Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Stability
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jfstabil

Procyclical implications of Basel II: Can the cyclicality of capital requirements
be contained?
Henrik Andersen ∗
Norges Bank, Financial Markets Department, Bankplassen 2, Norges Bank, Oslo, Norway

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 24 June 2009
Received in revised form 5 May 2010
Accepted 7 May 2010
Available online 19 May 2010
JEL classiﬁcation:
E32
G21
G28
G33
Keywords:
Basel II
Procyclicality
Capital positions

a b s t r a c t
While the current capital adequacy framework, Basel II, aims to make banks’ capital requirements more
sensitive to the underlying risk of the assets, it may also introduce an additional source of procyclicality in
the banking sector. In this paper we assess the potential cyclicality of Basel II for the entire bank portfolio.
This is in contrast to previous studies which have taken into account only parts of banks’ assets, and also
neglected the potential cyclicality of bank capital. We apply a detailed data set covering a relatively long
period to analyse the cyclicality of both bank capital and Basel II capital requirements. Moreover, we
employ a more comprehensive system of models than applied in the existing literature. Consistent with
previous evidence, we ﬁnd a substantial increase in the calculated Basel II capital requirements at the
same time as bank capital deteriorates in a recession scenario. However, we also ﬁnd that the cyclicality
of Basel II capital requirements may be effectively contained if risk weightings are based on a sufﬁciently
long observation period which includes economic downturns.
© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Bank regulations may amplify the procyclicality inherent in
bank lending behaviour; see e.g. Kashyap and Stein (2004). This
may particularly be the case with the current capital adequacy
framework. Basel II aims to make minimum capital requirements
more sensitive to the underlying risk of the banks’ operations than
the former framework, Basel I. However, the risk sensitive capital requirements may also reinforce the procyclicality of bank
behaviour; see e.g. Borio et al. (2001) and Catarineu-Rabell et
al. (2003). As bank assets and loans in particular, are assigned
higher risk weightings during economic downturns, required capital will increase. At the same time capital positions will tend to
deteriorate as loan losses accelerate. This may induce banks to
reduce lending and increase lending margins, thereby amplifying
the procyclicality of bank lending. Conversely, during an economic
upturn lower risk weightings and excess capital holdings may contribute to expanding credit volumes and risk fuelling a credit-led
boom.
When the capital adequacy ratio falls below desirable levels,
cuts in lending is not the only option; see Benford and Nier (2007).

∗ Tel.: +47 22 31 64 66.
E-mail address: Henrik.Andersen@Norges-Bank.no.
1572-3089/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jfs.2010.05.001

Banks may cut dividends in order to increase the regulatory capital,
but this may be far from sufﬁcient. Another option is to raise new
capital, though this might be very costly for existing shareholders when the banking sector is under pressure. Banks could also
attempt to sell part of their assets, but this cannot be the solution
for the entire sector.
Empirical research, however, strongly suggests that banks usually reduce lending; see e.g. Francis and Osborne (2009). Moreover,
Nier and Zicchino (2005) ﬁnd that the strength of the loan growth
response is non-linear and depends on the capital buffer available
to absorb losses. If capital buffers are below a comfort level, banks
cut their lending by more than if the capital buffers are ample.
It may be argued that the Basel II framework need not have
procyclical effects on the economic activity if every borrower
has access to non-bank ﬁnancing during downturns; see Saurina
and Trucharte (2006). However, the ongoing ﬁnancial crisis has
demonstrated that borrowers’ access to non-bank ﬁnancing may
be seriously hampered at the same time as banks contain their
lending.
The contribution of this paper to the literature is threefold:
ﬁrst, going beyond the existing literature, we calculate the Basel II
capital requirements for all corporate exposures, household exposures, bank exposures and sovereign exposures. Considering the
entire bank portfolio is important as the debt-servicing capacity
of enterprises, banks, households and sovereigns may be affected

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

differently by the business cycle. Second, we analyse both the
cyclicality of capital positions and the cyclicality of Basel II capital requirements at the same time. By this we take into account
that possible procyclical implications of Basel II also depend on
how the banks’ capital positions are affected by the business cycle.
Third, we apply a more comprehensive set of models and a more
detailed data set than commonly applied in the literature.1
We simulate the capital positions and minimum capital requirements based on a suite of models. A bank model employs a stress
scenario from a macro model and estimated Basel II risk weightings from an enterprise sector model, a household model, a logit
model for banks and a loss given default (LGD) model. Contrary
to most other studies, we apply the advanced IRB approach2 and
allow for cyclicality in both probability of default (PD) and LGD.
Our data set includes all Norwegian banks, all Norwegian jointstock companies and all Norwegian households. As our data set
covers a relatively long observation period and includes economic
downturn conditions, we are able to calculate different versions of
through-the-cycle (TTC) capital requirements.
Studies simulating the internal rating based (IRB) approach
of Basel II ﬁnd signiﬁcant cyclicality in the capital requirements
determined by internally estimated risk parameters.3 Estimated
increases in capital requirements in a downturn range from 30 to
202%, partly depending on the macroeconomic shocks considered,
the models employed and which parts of the bank portfolio were
included.
The capital adequacy of a bank is determined both by the
minimum capital requirement and the capital position. Thus, the
macroeconomic effects of Basel II will also depend on how the
banks’ capital positions are affected by the business cycle. Most
studies ﬁnd that capital positions tend to deteriorate during economic downturns.4
Our analysis sets out by demonstrating how risk sensitive
capital requirements can introduce an additional source of procyclicality in the banking sector. In a recession scenario for the
Norwegian economy, we document a substantial increase in the
calculated Basel II capital requirements even when the banks
employ TTC rating systems where the risk parameters are based on
ﬁve- and ten-year-moving averages. At the same time, bank capital deteriorates as banks record high losses on loans and securities.
However, the cyclicality can be effectively contained if the capital
requirements are calculated based on twenty-year-moving average PDs and LGDs covering economic downturn conditions. This is
because a longer observation period gives new observations lower
weight, and because the data from the previous economic down-

1
The literature typically tracks the rating for a hypothetical portfolio of corporate
exposures using either rating transition matrices, or market indicators of probability of default (PD), as a proxy for a bank’s rating system. Changes in PDs are mapped
to changes in capital requirements to estimate whether capital requirements vary
over a business cycles. Simulation studies based on rating agency transition matrices are often classiﬁed as more through-the-cycle (TTC). Studies applying different
versions of Merton’s option pricing model, such as Moody’s KMV, are often classiﬁed
as describing a point-in-time (PIT) rating system. Moody’s KMV default risk forecast is established as a commonly used indicator to calculate an enterprise’s default
risk on the basis of its stock price, balance sheet information and an option pricing
model.
2
Under the advanced IRB approach, banks provide their own estimates of the risk
parameters. The literature normally applies the foundation IRB approach. Under the
foundation IRB approach banks provide their own estimates of the PD, while the
remaining risk parameters are ﬁxed by supervisors.
3
See e.g. Altman et al. (2005), Benford and Nier (2007), Catarineu-Rabell et al.
(2003), Gordy and Howells (2006), Goodhart et al. (2004), Jakubik and Schmieder
(2008), Kashyap and Stein (2004), Marcelo and Scheicher (2005), Saurina and
Trucharte (2006) and Taylor and Goodhart (2006).
4
See e.g. Ayuso et al. (2004), Jokivuolle et al. (2008), Lindquist (2004), Bikker and
Metzemakers (2004) and Stoltz and Wedow (in press).

139

turn ensures that the initial risk parameters are already high before
the next downturn occurs.
During the recent ﬁnancial crisis, market pressure forced banks
to increase their capital adequacy ratios at the same time as losses
and writedowns reduced their capital positions. This induced banks
to tighten their credit standards which, in turn, ampliﬁed the economic downturn. As a response, the Basel Committee at the end of
2009 issued proposals that will reduce the procyclicality of capital
requirements, and promote the build-up of capital buffers in good
times.5 On the basis of a comprehensive impact assessment, a fully
calibrated set of standards will be developed by the end of 2010
and then gradually phased in. In this context, our analysis can shed
some light on how the new standards should be calibrated in order
to mitigate the procyclicality of capital requirements.
This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the Basel
II capital requirement formula. Section 3 presents the data and
methodology. Section 4 describes the procedures for projecting the
Basel II capital requirements and bank capital. Section 5 presents
and discusses the results of our analysis while Section 6 concludes.
2. Basel II and capital requirements
The Basel II framework is based on three mutually reinforcing
pillars: minimum capital requirements (Pillar I), the supervisory
review process (Pillar II) and market discipline (Pillar III).6 Focusing on Pillar I, the Basel II framework contains three different
approaches for calculating capital requirements for credit risk,
namely the standardised approach,7 the foundation IRB approach
and the advanced IRB approach. Basel II also includes capital
charges for market risk and operational risk.
Under the IRB credit risk approaches, banks must categorise
banking-book exposures into broad classes of assets with similar
underlying risk characteristics. The classes of assets are: Corporate,
Sovereign, Bank, Retail, Equity and Eligible purchased receivables.
Retail includes loans to households and loans to the smallest enterprises. Loans to the remaining enterprises are covered by Corporate.
Bank covers loans and other exposures to ﬁnancial institutions.
Sovereign includes loans and other exposures to public entities.
Within the Basel II framework the formula for calculating riskweighted assets (RWA) is a modiﬁed version of the so-called
Gaussian asymptotic single risk factor model of credit risk. The
solvency margin of the formula is set at 99.9%, i.e. the probability that required capital does not cover any deﬁcits should be less
than 0.1% over a one-year horizon. The formula is a function of PD,
LGD, exposure at default (EAD) and maturity (M). In addition, the
formula includes a parameter for maturity adjustment (b) and a
parameter for asset correlation (R).
The formula for calculating RWA for corporate, sovereign, bank
and retail exposures is




RWA = 12.5 × EAD × LGD × N
×



G(PD) +

√
√

R × G(0.999)

1−R






− (PD × LGD)

(1 + (M − 2.5)b)
,
(1 − 1.5b)

where N is the cumulative standard normal distribution function
and G its inverse. The maturity adjustment (b) is given by b =

5

See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009).
For a detailed description of the framework, see Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision (2006b).
7
The standardised approach is basically Basel I with more reﬁned risk-buckets
and enhanced by allowing banks to apply external ratings and acknowledging risk
mitigation effects.
6

140

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

(0.11852 − 0.05478 × ln(PD))2 , except in the case of retail exposures where b is set equal to zero. The decision to adjust for maturity
reﬂects the intuitive notion that, on the one hand, risk increases
with loan duration and, on the other hand, the likelihood that the
PD will deteriorate increases when the initial PD is low and the
maturity of the exposure is large. These factors suggest that capital
requirements should increase with the maturity of the exposures.
Under the advanced IRB approach, banks provide their own estimates of the PD, the LGD, the EAD and the M parameters. These
internal estimates must be grounded in historical experience and
empirical evidence. Basel II does not specify whether recent observations should be given more weight or not. The length of the
underlying historical observation period for the PD measure must
be at least ﬁve years. For corporate, retail and bank exposures, the
one-year PD cannot be below 0.03%. The LGD and EAD estimates
should reﬂect economic downturn conditions and the observation
period must be at least seven years (ﬁve years for retail exposures).
The LGD estimates used for the IRB capital calculation cannot be
less than the long-run default-weighted average.8
In the case of corporate, sovereign and bank exposures, the correlation factor (R) is given by

For all Norwegian households we have tax return data with
household income, debt and interest payments. This covers more
than two million households per year over the sample period
1986–2007. Data on standard living costs are taken from the
National Institute for Consumer Research.
For all Norwegian banks we have detailed ﬁnancial statements,
balance sheets and capital adequacy reports9 over the period
1991–2008. Information on individual borrowers of each bank is
not available, but the volumes of loans can be allocated to sectors and industries. Using this type of loan classiﬁcation we can
combine data from the banks’ balance sheets with detailed data on
individual enterprises and households along the sector/industry
dimension. The data source is the Bank Statistics.
3.2. Models

To calculate capital requirements according to the Basel II
framework we use Norges Bank’s proprietary database with
accounting data for enterprises, households and banks. This data
set probably includes more comprehensive and relevant information for calculating Basel II capital requirements than the market
indicators used in several of the previous simulation studies. Market liquidity effects, herd behaviour and several other mechanisms
in the capital market may produce substantial variation in market indicators that is not related to the borrowers’ probability of
default. Moreover, market indicators are only available for a fraction of the banks’ borrowers.
Our data on enterprises include annual ﬁnancial statements for
all Norwegian joint-stock individual companies over the period
1988–2007. The number of enterprises submitting their ﬁnancial
records to the database is up from 50,000 in 1988 to 190,000 in
2007. The total bank debt of these companies accounted for around
90% of the Norwegian banking sector’s loans to enterprises by the
end of 2007. The data source is the Statistics on enterprises.

We project the banks’ capital requirements and capital positions using a suite of models. The literature typically employs
rating agency transition matrices or different versions of Merton’s
option pricing model and market information to calculate the capital requirements for a hypothetical credit portfolio, i.e. an artiﬁcial
bank. We simulate the capital positions and the minimum capital
requirements of real banks.
Chart 1 illustrates the relationship between our models. Projections of key variables from a macro model, i.e. credit growth,
lending rates, wages, gross domestic product, inﬂation, house
prices and housing investments, are used as input in a bank model,
an enterprise model, a household model, a logit model for banks
and a LGD model.
The macro model is an equilibrium correction model for the
Norwegian economy. A core macro model has been expanded by
introducing relationships that are central to the analysis of ﬁnancial
stability. The GDP equation includes feedback effects from credit
and house prices to real activity. The macro model thus internalises the co-movement and procyclicality of credit, asset prices
and agent optimism discussed in the literature, see Borio et al.
(2001). The core model is estimated on a data set that includes
the 1988–92 banking crisis in Norway. The additional ﬁnancial stability equations are in general estimated on shorter samples partly
due to lack of data. Appendix A presents a stylised version of the
macro model. For a more detailed review of the relationships in the
macro model, see Andersen and Berge (2008).
The enterprise model predicts PDs and bank loans at the ﬁrm
level as a generalised logistic function of accounting data indicators
representing earnings, liquidity, ﬁnancial strength, industry, age
and size of the company. The mean PD for each industry is projected
from a base year by using autoregressive distributed lag models
(ADLs) with inputs from the macro scenarios. The projected PD is
then used to predict the default risk at the ﬁrm level. The ADLs
are estimated on the basis of annual data from 1989 to 2004. The
enterprise model and the projection procedures are described in
detail by Nordal and Syed (2010), who also document the results
of a back testing exercise.
The household model measures the ﬁnancial margin of each
household, deﬁned as the household income minus taxes, interest payments, repayment of debt and standard living costs. This
margin serves as a reasonable measure of the households’ debtservicing capacity. For a discussion of households’ margins, see
Vatne (2006, 2007). Forward projections of household income and
interest payments are based on the macro scenarios. Repayment
of debt is assumed to be linear over twenty years. Standard living

8
For each year considered in the observation period, the number of defaults
occurring is used to weight the ﬁnal calculated average.

9
The database does not include capital adequacy reports for branches of foreign
banks.



R = 0.12

1 − e−50PD
1 − e−50





+ 0.24

1−

1 − e−50PD
1 − e−50





−c 1−

S−5
45



where c is equal to zero for all exposures, except in the case of SME
borrowers where the parameter is set equal to 0.04. S is expressed
as total sales in million euros. For residential mortgage exposures
and qualifying revolving retail exposures R is equal to 0.15 and 0.04
respectively. For all other retail exposures R is given by:



R = 0.03

1 − e−35PD
1 − e−35





+ 0.16

1−

1 − e−35PD
1 − e−35



The formula takes only the correlation between the idiosyncratic
risk of an exposure and the systematic risk into account, ignoring
correlations between the idiosyncratic risks of different exposures
in a portfolio. Thus, the formula is based on the assumption that all
idiosyncratic risks are diversiﬁed away.
3. Data and models
3.1. Data

,

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

141

Chart 1. The relationship between the models.

costs are taken from the National Institute for Consumer Research
and depend on key characteristics of the household.
The bank model is a non-behaviour model. It includes data from
the banks’ annual ﬁnancial statements, balance sheets and capital
adequacy reports. The bank model is used to generate paths for
banks’ results and capital adequacy. The banks’ main income and
cost items are linked to variables in the macro model and the enterprise model. The bank model takes loan volumes, lending rates,
and labour costs from the macro model. Projections of loan losses
are taken from the enterprise model, the household model and the
LGD model. For a more detailed description of the bank model, see
Appendix B and Andersen and Berge (2008).
The logit model for banks provides estimates of the PD for individual banks, based on indicators of the banks’ capital adequacy,
earnings, liquidity, credit risk and concentration risk (see Andersen,
2008).10 These indicators are projected based on the macro scenarios before the PDs are computed by the logit model. The logit model
is estimated on the basis of quarterly bank data between 2000 and
2005. The predictive powers of the logit model were veriﬁed outside the estimation sample period by applying it to 11 failed banks
from the period 1990–93.
The LGD model is a simple dynamic model where the main
explanatory factor is changes in commercial property prices; see
Bernhardsen and Larsen (2007).11 They found that the LGD can be
projected with reasonable accuracy by this model. This is not surprising as banks’ lending to enterprises is often secured against
property. According to the estimated model, a 10% drop in commercial property prices leads, cet. par., to an increase in the LGD
of around 11 percentage points. Over time LGD tends towards a
constant level of 35%.
4. Projections
In this section we outline our procedures for projecting the six
largest Norwegian banks’12 capital positions, Basel II exposures and

10
Probability
of
failure = 9.55 − 0.93Capital
adequacy − 50.5Return
on
assets − 0.059Share of mortgages − 0.094Liquidity risk measure + 1908.3Expected
loss measure + 8.4Concentration risk measure.
11
LGD(t) = 0.085 + 0.76LGD(t − 1) − 1.09ln(commercial property prices).
12
DnB NOR, SpareBank 1 SR-Bank, Sparebanken Vest, SpareBank 1 SMN and SpareBank 1 Nord-Norge.

risk parameters based on the data and models described in Section
3. Generally, our procedures for approximating exposures and calculating risk parameters are in line with the Basel II requirements
described in Section 2. However, as it is not possible to reproduce
banks’ risk proﬁle completely, we need to incorporate some proxies for Basel II capital requirements on exposures not identiﬁed in
our data set.
4.1. Projection of Basel II exposures
We calculate Basel II capital charges on the banks’ total loans
to every sector and industry, including household exposures, bank
exposures and sovereign exposures. The bulk of the empirical literature only assess the cyclicality of Basel II capital requirements
for a hypothetical credit portfolio or parts of an individual bank’s
assets, typically the corporate portfolio.
Exposures to the corporate sector are approximated based on
data from the Bank Statistics and the Statistics on enterprises. Loans
to the corporate sector accounted for 28% of the assets in the Norwegian banking sector by the end of 2007. In the Bank Statistics the
corporate loan portfolio is composed of nine different industries.13
Data on total sales for each enterprise with bank debt makes it
possible to classify debts within each of the nine different industries as corporate exposures, retail exposures and SME exposures
for banks. While all enterprises with total sales less than 2 million
NOK are assumed to be retail exposures, all enterprises with total
sales exceeding 400 million NOK are assumed to be corporate exposures. The remaining enterprises are assumed to be SME exposures.
This is in accordance with the Basel II classiﬁcation. Based on this
assumption, 12.8% of the loans to the enterprise sector by the end
of 2007 were corporate exposures, 38.6% were SME exposures and
48.7% were other retail exposures. We assume that this distribution of exposures to corporates, retails and SMEs within each of the
nine industries is identical for each of the largest Norwegian banks
(and remains the same over the simulation period). This assumption should be innocuous when applied to the six large banks in
our sample. We proceed to calculate capital requirements for corporate, retail and SME exposures within each industry for each

13
Primary industries, Property management, Commercial services, Mining and
manufacturing, Oil and gas, Shipping abroad, Other transport, Construction and
Retail trade, hotel and restaurant.

142

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

individual bank. We thus take into account that different banks
have different exposures to individual industries, see Chart 2.
In this way we are able to differentiate the quality of borrowers between the banks. However, the data does not enable us to
take into account the variation in bankruptcy probabilities within
different risk groups. Some banks may end up with less creditworthy borrowers than others due to lower risk aversion or poorer risk
management.
Exposures to the households are approximated based on data
from the Bank Statistics. Residential mortgage loans (including home
equity lines of credit) accounted for 35% of the assets in the Norwegian banking sector at the end of 2007. The remaining retail
exposures, i.e. total loans to the retail market less residential mortgages and other retail exposures are assumed to be qualifying
revolving retail exposures. 4% of the Norwegian banking sector’s
assets are classiﬁed as qualifying revolving retail.
Bank exposures and sovereign exposures are reported in the Bank
Statistics. While bank exposures accounted for 6% of assets in the
Norwegian banking sector at the end of 2007, sovereign exposures
accounted for less than 1%. Equity includes all assets posted as
long-term shareholdings in the Bank Statistics. Equity exposures
accounted for less than 1% of the assets in the Norwegian banking
sector.
Off-balance sheet exposures and Eligible purchased retail and corporate receivables are not identiﬁed in the Bank Statistics. Thus,
capital requirements for these exposures are not calculated. These
exposures accounted for a negligible share of the six largest Norwegian banks’ total capital requirements by the end of 2008.
Altogether, we arrive at 31 different risk groups, including 27
different risk groups for enterprises. In the simulations below,
growth in the banks’ total loans to households and enterprises are
taken from the macro model (see Chart 1). The distribution of exposures to each of the nine industries in the corporate portfolio will be
projected by the enterprise model. Growth in residential mortgage
exposures and qualifying revolving retail exposures is set equal to
growth in total loans to households. Other exposures are assumed
to grow at the same rate as total loan growth.
4.2. Projection of Basel II risk parameters
We apply the advanced IRB approach to calculate capital
requirements for all Basel II exposures.14 Under the advanced IRB
approach, banks provide their own estimates of the risk parameters. Contrary to most other studies, we allow for cyclicality in both
the PDs and LGDs. Several studies argue that the LGDs are likely to
be affected by the economic cycle; see for example Altman et al.
(2005) and Dierick et al. (2005). Moreover, EADs may increase as
borrowers make more use of their loan commitment limits during an economic downturn; see for example Allen and Saunders
(2003). As the possibility of additional drawings on credit lines is
incorporated in the predicted loan growth we implicitly assume
that the EAD is affected by the cycle.
PDs for loans granted to the enterprises, i.e. Corporate, SME and
Other retail exposures are taken from the enterprise model (see
Chart 1). The PDs for bank exposures are taken from the logit model
for Norwegian banks. The PD for bank exposures is set equal to the
average probability of failure as predicted for the six banks in our
sample. The PDs for Sovereign exposures are set equal to the average
PD reported in the 5th Quantitative Impact Study (QIS 5) by Basel II

14
The six banks in our sample have only adopted the IRB approach for parts of their
holdings. For example, while the share of IRB exposures of total DnB NOR exposures
was 38% at end-2007, the IRB share of Nordea Bank Norge was 54%. The banks are
in the process of extending the IRB approach to their entire portfolios as set out in
the Basel II framework.

banks included in CEBS Group 1.15 The PDs for the residential mortgage loans and qualifying revolving retail exposures are assumed to
be proportional to the share of household debt held by households
with a negative ﬁnancial margin. The level of these PDs is calibrated
according to the QIS 5 study and the average Basel II parameters
reported by the Norwegian banks. Thus, our PDs are initially set
equal to the PDs reported by the Basel II banks and then assumed
to change with households’ debt-servicing capacity.
The LGDs on corporate exposures, SMEs, bank exposures,
sovereign exposures and small ﬁrms deﬁned as retail exposures are
taken from the LGD model. The LGDs of residential mortgage loans
and qualifying revolving retail exposures are initially set equal to
the average LGD of the QIS 5 study, i.e. 16.1 and 55.0% respectively.
However, these LGDs are assumed to change over the simulation
period in line with the LGD from the estimated model for enterprises. The LGDs are not allowed to be less than their long-run
default-weighted average. This is in accordance with the Basel II
framework.
The EADs of all on-balance sheet exposures are measured gross
of provisions. The effects of on-balance sheet netting are not taken
into account. The possibility of additional drawings on credit lines
is indirectly incorporated in the predicted loan growth. The EAD
estimates are therefore of a PIT character.
According to the advanced IRB approach the effective maturity
(M) should be measured based on cash ﬂow data. As data on cash
ﬂows are not reported in the Bank Statistics, we apply the foundation IRB approach for measuring M. Thus M is set equal to 2.5 years
for all exposures included in our study.
Due to data limitations we apply the simple risk weight
method16 for calculating the capital requirements for equity exposures. As the share of equity holdings not publicly traded is not
identiﬁed in our data set, we apply a 350% risk weight for all equity
exposures. This is in line with the simple risk weight method under
the market-based approach for equity exposures.
We calculate average risk parameters for each of the 31 different
risk groups. These aggregate bankruptcy probabilities reveal information only on the average quality of borrowers from each risk
group, and therefore only reﬂect the idiosyncratic risk for each bank
due to its specialisation in particular groups of borrowers. Another
potential disadvantage of using average risk parameters is that the
capital requirement formula is not linear, but concave. However,
Basel II urges banks to employ average risk parameters when calculating capital requirements for retail exposures.17 According to
our estimates 52% of the assets owned by the Norwegian banking
sector were retail exposures at the end of 2007. Consequently, our
calculation of capital charges based on average risk parameters for
different risk groups probably serve as a reasonable approximation.
However, errors may still arise from applying average risk parameters if the distribution of PDs, LGDs and EADs is not stable through
the economic cycle.

15
CEBS Group 1 banks are banks located in a country which are part of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors, have Tier 1 capital in excess of 3 billion
euros, are diversiﬁed and internationally active. For a detailed description of the QIS
5 study, see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2006a).
16
Under the market-based approach, banks are permitted to use two different
methods: a simple risk weight method or an internal models method. Under the
simple risk weight method a 300% risk weight is to be applied to equity holdings
that are publicly traded and a 400% risk weight is to be applied to all other equity
holdings.
17
According to Basel II, a retail exposure “must be one of a large pool of exposures,
which are managed by the bank on pooled basis”. Furthermore, Basel II underlines
that “For each identiﬁed pool of retail exposures, banks are expected provide an
estimate of the PD and LGD associated with the pool”. In Norwegian regulations,
banks estimating PDs for individual borrowers with statistical models can set the
PD associated with the pool equal to the unweighted average of these PDs.

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

143

Chart 2. The shares of loans to different industries for Norway’s ﬁve largest banks and Nordea Bank Norge. Percentage of total loans to the enterprise sector, 2008.

4.3. Projection of additional Basel II capital requirements
We need to incorporate some proxies for additional capital
requirements on exposures which are not identiﬁed in our data
set. The calculated cyclicality in our analysis is not expected to be
signiﬁcantly affected by the fact that we do not cover the cyclicality
of every single risk exposure.
The capital requirement for operational risk is calculated by
assuming that the (last reported) capital charge for operational
risk increases at the same rate as gross income. Operational risk is
not expected to be a source of increased procyclicality in the minimum capital requirements, as historical experiences indicate that
operational risk charges actually tends to increase during economic
upturns.
The calculation of capital charges for market risk cannot be performed on data available in the Bank Statistics. Instead, we use the
last reported capital charge for market risk at each bank. This capital
charge is adjusted for annual growth of the ﬁnancial assets exposed
to market ﬂuctuations identiﬁed in the banks’ balance sheets.
The additional Pillar II capital requirement18 is approximated
by multiplying the capital charge for all the identiﬁed exposures
by annual real GDP growth (mainland Norway) from the macro
model. This ensures that the Pillar II capital charge reﬂects business
cycle effects. However, negative GDP growth will not result in any
reductions in the Pillar I capital requirements. This is in line with
Basel II which does not allow for any reductions in Pillar I capital
requirements.
The capital charge for the remaining exposures, i.e. off-balancesheet exposures, purchased receivables and exposures to foreign
counterparts, and risk-reducing effects of guarantees and credit
derivatives, are endogenously determined as a residual; the capital
charge is equal to the difference between the latest Basel II capital
requirements identiﬁed in the Bank Statistics and the sum of all the

18
Under the supervisory review process (Pillar II), supervisors should address
whether the banks need to hold additional capital against credit risk concentrations, liquidity risk, interest rate risk in the banking book and other risks that are
not, or not fully, covered in Pillar 1. Supervisors generally expect banks to operate
above the minimum regulatory capital ratios and can require banks to hold capital
in excess of the minimum. External factors such as business cycle effects and the
macroeconomic environment should be considered. For a more detailed description
of the Pillar II capital charge, see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2006b).

capital charges speciﬁed above. In the projections, we assume that
this residual grows at the same rate as the sum of all the capital
charges speciﬁed above.

5. Simulations on the Basel II capital requirements and
capital positions
Based on the procedures outlined in Sections 3 and 4 we calculate Basel II capital requirements and capital positions for the six
banks under a four-year stress scenario. The projection period is
from end-2007 until end-2011.19
A severe shock in 2008 produces annual GDP growth of −1.6% in
2009, −0.5% in 2010 and 0.4% in 2011. Such a deep recession has not
been recorded in Norway since the late 1980s, i.e. during the previous banking crisis. A weakening of household conﬁdence in their
own ﬁnancial situation and the downturn of the Norwegian economy lead to a sharp fall in house prices. In 2011, real house prices
are about 50% lower than at the end of 2007. Consumer price inﬂation increases as a result of higher imported inﬂation. In response
to higher consumer price inﬂation, the interest rate rises rapidly
in 2008 to curb inﬂation. In 2009 the banks’ lending rate peaks at
8.1%.
Moreover, we assume that banks’ risk-willingness declines in
pace with heightened global liquidity and credit risk. Banks are
assumed to tighten lending sharply. Lower house prices and higher
bank lending rates result in lower corporate and household credit
growth and weaker economic developments. At the most, annual
growth in loans to enterprises and households falls 5 and 2% respectively. Weaker macroeconomic developments and higher bank
lending rates reduce borrowers’ debt-servicing capacity. This produces loan losses of 2.2% of total loans in 2011.
As in e.g. Peura and Jokivuolle (2004), we assume that banks
are not able to raise new capital. The margin between deposit and
lending rates is constant through the projection period, but the
premium on banks’ market funding costs increases. Dividends are
assumed to be 50% of after-tax proﬁt, and are not paid if banks
record a negative proﬁt.

19
Notice that this is a counterfactual scenario different from the one actually
realised in 2008 and 2009.

144

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

Chart 3. Non-performing loans in different industries in percent of total loans to the enterprise sector. Actual numbers 1998–2007 and PD projections for 2008–2011.

Chart 4. The share of household debt held by households with a negative ﬁnancial margin. Percentage of total loans to the household sector. Actual ﬁgures 1986–2007 and
projections for 2008–2011.

Chart 5. Probability of liquidity or solvency problems for Norway’s ﬁve largest banks and Nordea Bank Norge. Actual ﬁgures 1991–2007 and projections for 2008–2011.

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

145

Chart 6. The loan-loss ratio. Percentage of total defaulted loans, 1991–2007.

Initially, we employ our models to calculate PIT estimates of
PDs and LGDs based on the stress scenario. Thereafter, these risk
parameters are combined with the EADs and Ms and the Basel II
formula to compute capital requirements. Historical data and projections of the PDs are displayed in Charts 3–5. Chart 3 shows the
annual share of non-performing loans in different industries since
1988. The stress scenario PDs projected by the enterprise model
are also included in the chart.
In several industries the PDs increase substantially during the
last years of the simulation period and reach the highest level
since the Norwegian banking crisis. The increase in the PDs from
2008 to 2011 varies between 2% (property management) and 774%
(primary industries). Hence, the effect of the stress scenario on
different industries differs to a large extent.
The share of household debt held by households with a negative
ﬁnancial margin is reported in Chart 4. As outlined in Section 4.2, we
assume that the PDs for residential mortgage loans and qualifying
revolving retail exposures develop in line with this ratio. The share
of household debt held by households with a negative ﬁnancial
margin has been falling rapidly since 1989. However, according to
the household model the share increases in 2007 and 2008.
Chart 5 displays the average probability of liquidity or solvency
problems for the ﬁve largest domestically held banks and Nordea
Bank Norge. The probability of liquidity or solvency problems is
derived from the logit model for Norwegian banks. The mean probability of liquidity or solvency problems was 65% in 1991, at the
height of the Norwegian banking crisis. In the stress scenario this
probability increases rapidly during the simulation period and is
24% in 2011.
Chart 6 displays the historical loan-loss ratio. This ratio is equal
to the historical LGD. Towards the end of the previous banking crisis, i.e. in 1991, the loan-loss ratio was 54%. In 2002 the loan-loss
ratio peaked again at 25%.
5.1. PIT Basel II capital requirements
We calculate Basel II capital requirements based on a PIT rating
system and different versions of a TTC rating system. PIT models
are based on more recent data and aim to predict developments
over the next year, whereas TTC models aim to predict a long term
average performance for the obligor. According to Catarineu-Rabell
et al. (2003) many banks consider their rating systems as more PIT
than TTC in nature. The main reason for this is the difﬁculty of
obtaining sufﬁciently long data series for use in TTC systems. This

is especially the case for recently established banks or banks operating in new markets. In addition, banks may prefer to use recent
default data which is regarded as more relevant to the current
situation.
As a transitional arrangement the Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway allowed banks to employ the advanced IRB approach
in 2008 and the foundation IRB approach in 2008 and 2009 even in
cases where the historical observation period was no longer than
two years.20 This may have been done to promote a level playing
ﬁeld. Finally, constructing a TTC system is technically challenging
because structural variables that are used to classify borrowers also
vary with the cycle. Altogether, these facts indicate that calculating
PIT capital requirements is relevant.
We initially calculate PIT capital requirements based on single
year PDs and LGDs. The average PDs and LGDs included in our calculation of PIT Basel II capital requirements are reported in Table C.1.
The 0.03% ﬂoor is not binding in any single case. The LGDs are not
allowed to be less than the average LGDs, which are assumed to be
equal to the average LGDs reported in the QIS 5. This assumption
is in line with the Basel II requirement that LGD estimates should
reﬂect economic downturn conditions.
We compare our projections of Basel II capital requirements
with Basel I capital requirements which are based on constant
risk weights. The calculated Basel I capital requirements are only
affected by growth in banks’ total assets as we assume no sizeable
portfolio shifts during the projection period.
We ﬁnd that total Basel II capital requirements grow signiﬁcantly faster in the stress scenario than the Basel I capital
requirements, see Table 1. The Basel II risk-weighted assets increase
by 152% during the simulation period. In 2011 the total Basel II riskweighted assets for the six banks are 137% higher than the Basel I
risk-weighted assets. The largest relative difference between these
two ﬁgures for a single bank is 155%. These results support the
hypothesis that the Basel II capital requirements might rise substantially in a recession, as credit risk materialises and borrowers
are downgraded. The results also highlight the fact that risk can
easily be underestimated if measured over short periods and on
data that do not capture a complete credit cycle.
As reported in Table 1, the Basel II risk-weightings increase substantially for Bank exposures, Corporates, SMEs and Other retail

20
See § 49-2 of the capital requirement regulations for Norwegian ﬁnancial institutions (2006): FOR 2006-12-14 nr 1506.

146

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

Table 1
Risk-weighted assets for the ﬁve largest Norwegian banks and Nordea Bank Norge. Millions of NOK, 2008–2011.
September 2008

2008

2009

2010

2011

Reported Basel II risk-weighted assets
Operational Risk
Market Risk
Pillar II
Retail mortgages
Qualifying revolving retail
Bank
Sovereign
Corporates
SME
Other retail
Equities
Residual

1295
67
46
30
124
24
157
4
61
162
117
67
436

0
56
50
36
206
24
186
4
73
193
140
68
526

0
57
49
0
466
35
545
7
139
367
263
66
1050

0
59
48
0
453
30
693
8
191
499
339
65
1256

0
63
48
0
300
19
682
7
178
469
307
65
1126

Total Basel II risk-weighted assets
Basel 1 risk-weighted assets

1295
1479

1562
1461

3045
1412

3642
1383

3264
1377

exposures. The main driver behind the accelerating capital requirements for bank exposures is the increase in the PD mainly driven
by deteriorating earnings and falling capital adequacy ratios. The
LGDs of all sectors increase rapidly during the simulation period as
property prices fall by around 50%. This sharp fall is an important
driver behind the increase in the total capital requirements.
The share of household debt held by households with a negative
ﬁnancial margin peaks in 2008 at 14%, and then falls to 13.3% in
2009 and below 10% in 2010 and 2011. This reduces the capital
requirements for retail mortgages and qualifying revolving retail
during the last years of the projection period.
5.2. TTC Basel II capital requirements
Under the Basel II framework banks are urged to use a TTC rating system. In order to calculate TTC PDs we combine historical
data with projections of the PDs. The data employed to calculate TTC PDs are shown in Charts 3–5. As in Benford and Nier
(2007), we set the TTC PDs equal to the ﬁve-year-moving average PDs. We also calculate TTC Basel capital requirements based
on ten-year-moving average PDs. Accordingly, we apply ﬁve- and
ten-year-moving average LGDs.
The risk parameters included in the TTC calculation of Basel II
capital requirements are reported in Tables C.2 and C.3. The PDs
still increase rapidly during the simulation period. When the tenyear-moving average is applied, the increase in the PDs during
the simulation period differs from 1% (mining) to 127% (primary
industries). The increase in the PDs based on the ﬁve-year-moving
average differs from 16% (mining) to 386% (shipping abroad). The
0.03% ﬂoor is not binding in any single case.
The ﬁve- and ten-year-moving average LGDs also increase
substantially. When the ten-year-moving average is applied, the
increase in the LGDs during the simulation period differs from
17% (qualifying revolving retail) to 102% (retail mortgages). The
increases in the LGDs are somewhat higher when the ﬁve-yearmoving average is employed.
Tables C.4 and C.5 report the TTC calculated risk-weighted assets
for the different exposures. Interestingly, the increase in the TTC
Basel II risk-weighted assets is still sizeable. The Basel II riskweighted assets, based on the ten-year-moving average, increase
by 64% during the simulation period. In 2011 the Basel II riskweighted assets based on the ten-year-moving average are 55%
higher than the Basel I risk-weighted assets. The difference is 123%
when the ﬁve-year-moving average PDs and LGDs are applied.
These results reveal that banks adopting TTC rating systems
may still experience substantial cyclicality in their Basel II capital requirements. The calculated increases in the Basel II capital

requirements are higher than the increases documented by empirical studies like Kashyap and Stein (2004) and Saurina and Trucharte
(2006). According to Kashyap and Stein (2004), TTC models lead
to increases in capital requirements for corporate exposures of
between 30 and 45% over the period 1998–2002. This was a period
marked by pronounced economic slowdowns in both the US and
Europe. PIT models result in increases of between 70 and 90% over
the same period. Saurina and Trucharte (2006) found that the maximum TTC capital requirements were 56% higher than the minimum
TTC capital requirements for retail mortgages in Spain during the
period 1990–2004. Our analysis shows increases in the Basel II capital requirements in the range of 64% (TTC) to 152% (PIT). Benford
and Nier (2007) found that the maximum TTC capital requirements
were between 170 and 202% higher than the minimum TTC capital requirements for retail mortgages in the UK during the period
1983–2006.
Comparing results across different studies is, however, challenging as they vary along a number of dimensions. First, the
macroeconomic shocks considered differ to a large extent. While
we consider a recession scenario, other studies consider the implications of milder economic slowdowns. Second, the universe of
borrowers considered varies across different studies. This affects
the results when the sensitivity to macroeconomic shocks differs
across borrowers. Finally, the models employed and the Basel II
approaches applied differ to a large degree. For instance, allowing
for cyclicality in LGDs in our analysis, contrary to most other studies, raises the estimated increase in Basel II capital requirements
by around two thirds.
5.3. Simulations on capital positions and Basel II capital adequacy
Ultimately, it is the cyclicality in the capital adequacy that
matters. Thus, the macroeconomic effects of Basel II will also
depend on how the banks’ capital buffers are affected by the
business cycle. In our bank model the regulatory capital is endogenously determined by the proﬁt net of losses and after taxes and
dividends.21
Chart 7 displays the average capital adequacy ratio for the
six banks calculated using the Basel I approach, the Basel II PIT

21
Under Basel II, the difference between total provisions and total expected losses
must be deducted from regulatory capital when expected losses exceed provisions.
50% of the deduction must be made from Tier 1 capital and 50% from Tier 2 capital.
Expected losses associated with equity exposures under the PD/LGD approach and
securitisation exposures are not included in the sum of total expected losses. Total
provisions include speciﬁc provisions, partial write-offs and general provisions. We
assume that total provisions equal total expected losses.

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

Chart 7. Mean capital adequacy in the ﬁve largest domestically held banks and
Nordea Bank Norge. Percents of risk-weighted assets, 2008–2011.

approach and the two Basel II TTC approaches. With constant risk
weights (Basel I) the capital adequacy of the six banks falls close
to the required level of 8% in 2011 unless new capital is raised.
The reported Basel I capital adequacy ratio is mainly determined
by changes in the capital position as we assume no sizeable portfolio shifts during the projection period. In the recession scenario,
negative results in 2010 and 2011 reduce the capital position by
16% from 2008 to 2011. Consequently, the Basel I capital adequacy
ratio falls from 10.0% in 2008 to 8.8% in 2011. This demonstrates
that changes in the capital position may affect capital adequacy
substantially.
We ﬁnd a negative co-movement between capital positions and
Basel II capital weightings, i.e. capital positions deteriorate at the
same time as capital requirements increase during the recession
scenario. With the PIT Basel II approach the capital requirements
of the six banks are violated already in 2009, and the ratio falls from
9.3% in 2008 to 3.7% in 2011. Thus, the added cyclical pressure on
bank capital positions caused by Basel II PIT capital requirements
is quite extreme.
With the TTC Basel II approaches the added cyclicality in the
capital adequacy ratio is still sizeable. Even if the six banks employ
TTC Basel II capital requirements based on ten-year-moving average PDs, they violate the capital requirements during the two last
years of the projection period.
One explanation behind the small difference in the cyclicality
of TTC and PIT capital requirements may be the fact that the capital requirements formula is concave. Thus, the effect on the capital
charge of an 800% increase in the PDs is less than eight times the
effect of a 100% increase in the PDs. In addition, the PDs based
on moving averages increase substantially during the simulation
period, see Tables C.2 and C.3. Loan losses are often unexpected
and tend to increase rapidly. Surprisingly high loan losses affect
the risk parameters even when the historical observation period is
ten years. Thus, Basel II may introduce signiﬁcant cyclicality in the
capital requirements even when the banks have access to default
data over a full decade.
However, the cyclicality in the Basel II capital requirements
can be effectively contained if the historical observation period is
sufﬁciently long and includes economic downturn conditions. We
ﬁnally apply twenty-year-moving average PDs and LGDs, based
on the data in Charts 3–5, in order to cover the previous banking crisis. As reported in Table C.6, the risk parameters based
on the twenty-year-moving average are fairly stable. Several PDs
actually fall during the simulation period as the previous banking
crisis is given lower weight. Thus, in 2011 the TTC Basel II risk-

147

weighted assets, based on the twenty-year-moving average, are
only 5% higher than the Basel I risk-weighted assets, see Table C.7.
The TTC Basel II risk-weighted assets, based on the twenty-yearmoving average, do not exhibit any signiﬁcant cyclicality during
the simulation period.
The removal of cyclicality can be explained as follows. First, with
a data set covering a sufﬁciently long observation period the volatility in capital requirements is contained as new observations are
given low weight. Second, when the risk parameters are estimated
on a data set covering economic downturns, the increase in capital requirements during economic downturns is curbed as the risk
parameters are already high.
Our analysis demonstrates that the shorter the time series
applied in banks’ risk models are, the more the capital requirement swings with the business cycle. The impact can be substantial.
According to Basel II, internal estimates of PD must be based
on a historical observation period covering at least ﬁve years.
The LGD and EAD estimates should reﬂect economic downturn
conditions and the observation period must be at least seven
years. Some countries permit the use of considerably shorter time
series than the optimal through-the-cycle coverage. In addition,
the available time series tend to not include data from recessions.
In sum, we ﬁnd that the observation period should be longer
than ten years, and cover a recession in order to contain the cyclicality in the Basel II capital requirements. Thus, the difference
between the time series employed and the ideal time series should
be taken into account when the Basel Committee calibrate the new
set of standards to reduce the procyclicality of capital requirements.

6. Conclusion
A growing body of literature has assessed the potential cyclicality of Basel II. However, only parts of banks’ assets have
been considered in each study. In addition, the cyclicality of the
capital positions is usually not taken into account. This paper
analyses the cyclicality of capital positions and the cyclicality of
Basel II capital requirements for the entire asset portfolio of six
Norwegian banks. In addition, we apply a more comprehensive
modelling approach and a more detailed data set than commonly
applied in the literature. A bank model developed for stress-testing
purposes is combined with bankruptcy probabilities from an enterprise model, from a logit model for banks and from a household
model.
Our analysis provides some new evidence on the cyclical nature
of Basel II. Based on a recession scenario for the Norwegian economy, we document a substantial increase in the calculated Basel
II capital weightings even when the banks employ a throughthe-cycle rating system where the risk parameters are based on
a ten-year observation period. In our stress scenario, bank capital also deteriorates as the banks record high losses on loans and
securities.
The added cyclical pressure on bank capital positions caused
by Basel II may be of a larger magnitude than the pre-existing
effect under Basel I. However, the cyclicality of their Basel II capital
requirements can be effectively contained if the historical observation period is sufﬁciently long and includes economic downturn
conditions. Basel II risk-weighted assets, based on the twenty-yearmoving average, do not exhibit any signiﬁcant cyclicality during our
simulation period.
The Basel Committee will by the end of 2010 develop a revised
capital adequacy framework in order to reduce the procyclicality in the banking sector. Our analysis of the cyclicality of capital

148

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

positions and Basel II capital requirements can provide useful
indications on how the capital adequacy framework should be calibrated in order to mitigate procyclicality. The shorter the time
series applied in banks’ risk models are, the stronger the measures
needed to reduce the procyclicality of capital requirements will
be.
An important area for further work is to develop a bank model
covering the most important aspects of bank behaviour. The bank
model employed in our analysis does not enable us to evaluate
how banks may respond to the macro scenarios. Banks may for
instance react to a tighter capital constraint by cutting off credit to
its riskier borrowers, see e.g. Jokipii and Milne (2010). On the other
hand, banks may not be able to attract borrowers of high credit
quality when the economy is in a downturn. For a more complete
representation we would also need to model contagion between
banks.

Import prices
pit = 0.4vt +1.3pit∗ −0.4[(pi − pi∗ − v)t−1 − 0.6(p − p∗ − v)t−1 ]
Estimation period 1990Q1–2007Q2
Unemployment


ut = 0.4ut−1 − 1.6

1
4
2

2




The author is indebted to an anonymous referee, Farooq Akram,
Sigbjørn Atle Berg, Bent Vale and Eivind Bernhardsen for useful
comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
author and should not be interpreted as reﬂecting those of Norges
Bank (the Central Bank of Norway).

1
4
2

yt−j − mean

		

2


j=1

yt−j
j=1

− 0.03[ut−2 − 11.1(w − p)t ]

Estimation period 1979Q3–2007Q4

(4)

Wages
wt = zt − 0.5(wt−1 − zt−1 ) − 0.1[wt−2 − pt−1 − zt−2
+ 0.001ut−1 − w ]

Acknowledgements

(3)

Estimation period 1978Q4–2007Q4
(5)

Consumer prices
pt = 0.3pt−2 + 0.1yt−1 + 0.1(wt−1 − zt−1 ) + 0.1pet
− 0.06[pt−3 − 0.65(wt−3 − zt−2 ) − 0.35pit−1 − p ]

Appendix A. The macro model

Estimation period 1978Q4–2007Q4

The core macro model is an extension of the model reported
in Bårdsen and Nymoen (2008) and Bårdsen et al. (2005).22 It
is a macro-econometric model estimated on quarterly data. The
model explicitly takes into account several channels of interplay
between output, inﬂation and ﬁnancial stability. The equations are
in equilibrium-correction form, with backward-looking expectations formation.
We present a stylised version of the model in Eqs. (1)–(13). Small
letters denote natural logarithms of the variable,  denotes the
ﬁrst difference operator, j denotes the j-period difference operator, and foreign variables are denoted with starred superscripts.
In general, intercept terms and seasonal effects have been omitted from the equations for ease of exposition. The identities that
complete the model are not reported.
Aggregate demand
yt = −0.6yt−1 + 0.7gt + 0.4gt−1 + 0.1(ph − p)t−1

Money market interest rate
∗
− 1) + 0.4Rt∗ − 0.5
Rt = 1.5(tc − 2.5) − 0.6(Rt−1 − Rt−1

⎛

⎞

1
×⎝
ut−j − 2⎠
4
4

Estimation period 1991Q1–2007Q2

j=1

(7)
Banks’ lending rate
RLt = 0.8Rt + 0.2Rt−1 − 0.35[RLt−1 − (Rt−1 + RLM)]

(8)

Household debt
(cr h − pt ) = −0.01(RLt−2 + RLt−3 ) + 0.3(inc − p)t−1
+ 0.1((ph − p)t − (ph − p)t−3 ) − 0.04[(cr h − p)t−1

+ 0.1(cr e − p)t−1 + 0.2(cr h − p)t−3
− 0.3[(yt−2 − 0.8gt−2 − 0.1(v + p∗ − p)t−1 − 0.1(cr h − p)t−4
+ 0.01(RL − )t−1 ]

(6)

− 0.7(ph − p)t−4 + 0.04RLt−4 − 1.2(inc − p)t−2 ]
Estimation period 1991Q1–2007Q2

(9)

Estimation period 1991Q1–2006Q4
(1)

House prices
pht = 0.2inct − 0.03RLt − 0.02RLt−1 + 0.03Hte

Exchange rate
vt =

ϕ(−0.04Rt + 0.05Rt∗

h
−0.1[pht−1 +0.05RLt−1 + 0.5ut −1.3(inc − hs)t−1 −0.3crt−1
]

− 0.1pot − 0.07ut−1 )

Estimation period 1990Q2–2006Q4

(10)

∗

− 0.1[(v + p − p)t−1 + 0.03((R − )t−1 − (R∗ − ∗ )t−1 )
+ 0.1(po + usd − p)t−1 − v ]
Estimation period 1994Q2–2007Q2

Housing investments



(2)
jt = −0.044

1
RL −
3

1


j=−1

	
c
t−j


− 0.01

t

1
RL −
3

1


	
c
t−j

j=−1

t−4

− 0.1[(jt−1 −hst−10 )−(ph − p)t−4 − (inc − p)t−1 − (pj − p)t−4 ]
22
The presentation of the core part of the macro model is based on Bårdsen and
Nymoen (2008).

Estimation period 1991Q1–2007Q4

(11)

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

Household default rate
(dh − cr h ) = −0.23 (dh − cr h )t−1 + 0.022 (RL − )t
+ 0.022 (RL − )t−2 − 0.54 (ph − p)t
− 0.2[(dh − cr h )t−4 − 0.4ut−3 − 0.08(RL − )t−4
+ 1.2(inc − p)t−1 + 1.2(ph − p)t−4 ]
Estimation period 1993Q1–2005Q4

(12)

Firm default
(de − p)t = −0.32 (de − p)t−1 + 0.022 (RL − )t + 0.9ut
+ 0.7ut−1 + 1.5(cr e − p)t−3 − 0.4(po + usd − p)t
− 0.5[(de − p)t−3 − (cr e − p)t−4 − 0.05(RL − )t−3
− 1.7ut−2 + 0.7(v + p∗ − p)t−3 + 0.5(po + usd − p)t ]
Estimation period 1992Q1–2005Q4

(13)

where  = 100(4 Pt /Pt−4 ) is the inﬂation rate; u =
u ) is the core inﬂation rate, i.e. inﬂation adjusted for
100(4 Ptu /Pt−4
∗ ) is the
changes in energy prices and taxes; ∗ = 100(4 Pt∗ /Pt−4
foreign inﬂation rate.
Growth in real aggregate demand (y) is modelled in Eq. (1).
Aggregate demand is affected by the real interest rate (RL − ), real
government expenditure (g) and the real exchange rate (v + p∗ −
p). Thus, a change in the nominal exchange rate would directly
affect aggregate demand. Aggregate demand is also affected by
house prices and credit. Changes in real house prices (ph − p) have
short-run effects on aggregate demand through a wealth effect on
consumption and through housing investments not captured by the
real interest rate. Real corporate credit (cre − p) affects GDP in the
short run, while real household credit (crh − p) has long-run effects
on GDP. The short-run effect is interpreted as reﬂecting frictions in
the credit market, while the long-run effect points towards a form
of rationing of the household sector.
The exchange rate (in logs denoted v) expresses the number of domestic currency units per unit of foreign currency. The
equation of growth of the nominal effective exchange rate (v)
in Eq. (2) reacts to deviations from PPP (v + p∗ − p) and hence
contributes to stabilising the real exchange rate. ϕ is a dummy
for inﬂation targeting, and takes the value 0 up until 2001Q1
and the value 1 from 2001Q2. In the long run, the nominal
exchange rate reﬂects the difference between domestic and foreign prices and the difference between domestic and foreign
real interest rates (R − ) − (R∗ − ∗ ). Accordingly, domestic inﬂation is fully reﬂected in the nominal exchange rate in the long
run.
Import prices measured in domestic currency (pi) are a homogenous function of the nominal exchange rate (v) and foreign
producer prices measured in foreign currency (pi*). On the other
hand, import prices increase if the real exchange rate (in terms of
consumer prices) appreciates. This is due to pricing-to-markets in
import price setting.
The unemployment rate (u) follows output growth (y) in the
short run as an Okun’s law relationship, see Eq. (4). In addition, it
exhibits slow reversion towards its equilibrium rate; an intercept
term has been omitted.
There is a pass-through of consumer price inﬂation (p) to nominal wage growth (w) in the short run; see Eq. (5). In each period,
nominal wages adjust towards their long-run relationship where
there is a full pass-through of consumer prices and productivity

149

(z). However, the mark-up of wages on prices and productivity is
inversely related to the unemployment rate (u).23
In the short run, consumer price inﬂation varies with changes in
aggregate demand (y) and to some extent nominal wage growth
(w); see Eq. (6). In addition, it adjusts to deviation from the longrun relationship for consumer prices. In the long run, consumer
prices (p) reﬂect a weighted average of domestic and imported
costs, represented by unit labour costs (w − z) and import prices
(v + p∗ ). It follows that the initial effect of a change in nominal
exchange rate on aggregate demand would become modiﬁed over
time due to the exchange rate pass-through to inﬂation, which
would have an effect opposite that of the nominal exchange rate on
the real exchange rate. The model also includes an equation for the
underlying, i.e. core, inﬂation rate (pc ), which is linked to consumer
price inﬂation.
The three-month money market interest rate (R) follows an estimated Taylor-type rule in Eq. (7). Since March 2001, Norwegian
monetary policy is aimed at targeting the annual core inﬂation
rate (c ) at 2.5%. Despite the fact that Norwegian monetary policy has changed over time24 the estimated equation is stable over
the estimation period 1991–2006. The interest rate responds to
deviation from target in domestic core inﬂation and to deviation in
unemployment from 2%. This unemployment gap represents the
output gap. If the interest rate deviates from the foreign interest
rate including a premium of 1 percentage point, this also affects
the interest rate.
Banks’ lending rate (RL) is deﬁned to follow the money market
rate. A lending margin (RLM), i.e. the margin between the lending rate and the money market rate, is an exogenous variable in
the model. The coefﬁcients of this equation are calibrated and not
estimated.
The relationship explaining movements in household debt in
Equation (9) builds on the work presented in Jacobsen and Naug
(2004). Growth in household debt (cr h ) reacts positively to
growth in income (inc) and housing prices (ph), and decreases
with higher interest rate on loans (RL); see Jacobsen and Naug
(2004) for further details.
The model of house prices (ph) in Equation (10) is based on
Jacobsen and Naug (2005). The growth rate of nominal house
prices (ph) is explained by growth in nominal income (inc) and
household expectations about their own ﬁnancial situation and the
Norwegian economy (He ), i.e. a survey-based consumer conﬁdence
indicator, as well as interest rate changes (RL) and deviations
from steady state. In steady state, house prices (ph) are mainly
determined by income (inc) and housing capital (hc) in addition to
the interest rate (RL), the unemployment rate (u), and household
debt (crh ).
The equation for gross ﬁxed housing investment (j) is based
on Jacobsen et al. (2007), see Eq. (11). Growth in gross ﬁxed
housing investment
(j) dependson the change in the real lend
ing rate 4 RL − (1/3)

1

j=−1

c

. In steady state, gross ﬁxed
t

investment depends on the level of housing capital (hs) due to
replacement investment, real house prices (ph − p), real investment
price (pj − p), households’ real wage 
income (inc − p) as a proxy
 for
land costs, and the real lending rate

RL − (1/3)

1

j=−1

c
t−j

.
t−4

23
The constant mark-up term is suppressed. In the full econometric model,
productivity (z) is an endogenous variable that depends on real wages (w − p),
unemployment (u) and a deterministic trend.
24
At the very beginning of the sample, NOK was pegged to the ECU, but went
ﬂoating in December 1992. Although inﬂation targeting was formally introduced in
March 2001, it is a common view that this regime was gradually introduced from
early 1999.

150

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

Chart 8. The bank model.

The equations of default25 by households and ﬁrms in (12) and
(13) respectively are based on Berge and Boye (2007). Households’
default rate (dh − cr h ), i.e., default as a share of total household
bank debt, depends on households’ real income (inc − p), unemployment (u), the real interest rate (RL − ) and real house prices
(ph − p). With respect to ﬁrms’ default, there is not homogeneity between default and debt in the short run, only in the long
run. Firms’ default, measured in real terms (de − p), depends on
the level of debt (cr e − p), the real interest rate (RL − ), domestic
demand proxied by the unemployment rate (u), the real exchange
rate (v + p∗ − p) as a measure of competitiveness and the real oil
price (po + usd − p). The latter variable captures that the level of
activity and investments in the oil sector affect other industries.
In addition, SMM includes estimated equations for bankruptcies
in ﬁrms adapted from Jacobsen and Kloster (2005), productivity (z),
and bond rates (RB).

B.1. Banks’ proﬁt and loss account
Banks’ proﬁt after tax and dividends is calculated in the following manner:
PRO = NII + OOI − OOC − LL − T − DIV

(2.1)

where proﬁt after tax and dividends (PRO) depends on net interest
income (NII), other operating income (OOI), other operating costs
(OOC), loan losses (LL), tax (T) and dividends (DIV).
Net interest income (NII) which is included in the calculation of
banks’ proﬁt after tax and dividends (see Eq. (2.1)), is calculated as
follows:
NII = ((L − 1 + L)/2) · LR+((OA − 1 + OA)/2) · ROA−((D − 1 + D)/2)
· RD − ((OL − 1 + L)/2) · ROL

(2.2)

The bank model is a non-behavioural model and consists of
three main components: proﬁt and loss account, balance sheet and
capital adequacy calculation, see Chart 8.
The proﬁt and loss account and the balance sheet have a reciprocal effect on each other. Banks’ proﬁt after tax and dividends
directly affects banks’ equity capital included in the balance sheet.
At the same time, net interest income, which is included in the
proﬁt and loss account, is determined by the size of the assets and
liabilities in the balance sheet. The balance sheet affects the capital adequacy calculation. Equity capital is an important item in
the calculation of regulatory capital included in the capital adequacy calculation. The balance sheet also affects the risk-weighted
assets for capital adequacy calculation. The bank model’s projections make use of the output from the macro model on lending,
lending rates and labour costs. The model may be used for individual banks or groups of banks, depending on the purpose of the
analysis. A detailed presentation of the model follows.

where the subscript −1 indicates that the variable is from the previous year. Net interest income (NII) depends on net lending (L),
average lending rate (LR), other interest-bearing assets (OA), average interest rate on other interest-bearing assets (ROA), deposits
from customers and other ﬁnancial institutions (D), average interest rate on deposits from customers and other ﬁnancial institutions
(RD), other interest-bearing liabilities (OL)26 and average interest
rate on other interest-bearing liabilities (ROL). An increase in the
average interest rate on loans and other interest-bearing assets
increases in isolation net interest income, whereas an increase in
the average interest rate on deposits and other interest-bearing liabilities has the opposite effect. In addition, growth in total assets
will increase net interest income if the marginal interest rate is
higher on interest-bearing assets than on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income as a share of banks’ total operating income
has fallen over the past ten years, although the share was nonetheless 67% at end-2007. It is therefore especially important that the
projections for this income item are accurate.
Other operating income (OOI) which is included in the calculation
of banks’ proﬁt after tax and dividends (see Eq. (2.1)), is calculated

25
Our data on problem loans include both default and loans with a high probability
of default as reported by the banks.

26
Other interest-bearing liabilities include short-term paper, bonds, subordinated
loans and other debt.

Appendix B. The bank model

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

as follows:
OOI = FEE + SD + NGS + NGFE + NGD + OGI

(2.3)

where other operating income is the sum of fee income (FEE), share
dividends (SD), gains/losses on securities (NGS), foreign exchange
(NGFE) and derivatives (NGD), as well as other gains and income
(OGI).
Fee income (FEE), which is included in the calculation of other
operating income (see Eq. (2.3)), is calculated using an error correction model estimated on quarterly data:
 ln(FEE) = −4.82 − 0.37 ln(FEE − 1) + 0.60 ln(GDP − 1)
+ 1.51(R5Y −R3M)−1−0.003FORB+0.94 ln(GDP)
+ 0.23 ln(FEE − 4) + 0.02S1 + 0.01S2 − 0.001S3
(2.4)
where ln designates the logarithm of the variable, the subscript
−1 indicates that the variable is from the previous quarter and 
designates the ﬁrst difference, i.e.  ln(FEE) = ln(FEE) − ln(FEE − 1).
Banks’ fee income is estimated using GDP (GDP), the yield differential between 5-year government bonds (R5Y) and three-month
money market rates (R3M), and the market share of branches of
foreign banks (FORB). The equation also contains the effects of seasonal variations (S(i)). See Andersen et al. (2008) for a more detailed
description of the equation. At the end of 2007, fee income was the
largest item in other operating income, accounting for 55% of the
total.
Other operating costs (OOC) include labour costs, commission
costs, electronic data processing costs and other costs. Labour costs
represented the largest item, accounting for 55% of other operating
costs in 2007.
Loan losses (LL) have been low in recent years, but may increase
considerably if the ﬁnancial position of borrowers deteriorates.
During the Norwegian banking crisis in the period 1988–1993, loan
losses were very high, and in 1991 loan losses were higher than
other operating costs. Projected loan losses are derived from the
enterprise model, the household model and the LGD model.
Tax (T) is set at 28% of proﬁt before tax and dividends. The average share of tax that banks have charged to income during the past
ﬁve years is slightly less than 28%, but the share varies from year
to year.
Banks’ dividends (DIV) are assumed to be 50% of after-tax proﬁt.
A dividend is not paid if banks record a negative proﬁt.
B.2. Banks’ balance sheets
A bank’s balance sheet consists of an asset column listing the
bank’s assets and a liability column indicating how the assets have
been funded. The assets in the balance sheet comprise the following
items:
• loans to households and enterprises
• securities and deposits in other ﬁnancial institutions
• other assets

151

Loans, accounting for 67% of banks’ total assets in 2007, represented the dominant asset on the balance sheet.
Liabilities comprise the following items:
•
•
•
•
•

customer deposits
market funding
other debt
subordinated loans
equity capital

Deposits, accounting for 62% of banks’ total liabilities, represented the dominant liability on the balance sheet. Market funding
comprises bonds, short-term paper and loans from other ﬁnancial
institutions.
B.3. Banks’ capital adequacy
The calculation of banks’ capital adequacy is based on projections of regulatory capital and the risk-weighted assets for capital
adequacy. Banks’ regulatory capital is the sum of Tier 1 capital and
subordinated debt. It is impossible, however, to identify all components of Tier 1 capital. Therefore, a residual, i.e. the difference
between the last reported ﬁgure for Tier 1 capital and the sum of
the Tier 1 capital items in the balance sheet, is also projected. The
risk-weighted assets for capital adequacy are calculated separately
based on projections for the assets portfolio and the corresponding
risk parameters.
B.4. Risk factors that can be analysed using the bank model
The bank model can be used to analyse the effect of several different risk factors on banks’ proﬁt and ﬁnancial strength. Credit risk
affects banks’ loan losses (LL). Credit risk is therefore included in the
bank model through the effect of estimated loan losses on banks’
proﬁt (PRO) and capital adequacy.
Liquidity risk affects banks’ funding costs. In the bank model, the
deposit rate (DR) and the interest rate on other interest-bearing
liabilities (ROL) can be adjusted as a result of changes in liquidity
risk. Changes in the interest rate that banks pay for funding affects
estimated net interest income (NII) as well as banks’ proﬁt (PRO)
and capital adequacy.
Market risk affects dividends (DIV) and gains/losses on securities
(NGS), foreign exchange (NGFE) and derivatives (NGD). Changes in
market risk are thus important to other operating income (OOI),
which is included in the calculation of banks’ proﬁt (PRO) and capital adequacy.
Banks can incur considerable losses as a result of operational
risk. In the bank model, costs resulting from operational risk are
included in other operating costs (OOC). Losses due to operational
risk will thus lead to higher costs, lower proﬁts (PRO) and a reduction in capital adequacy in the bank model.
Appendix C.
See Tables C.1–C.7.

152

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

Table C.1
PIT risk parameters, 2008–2011.
2008

2009

2010

2011

Exposure

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

Bank
Sovereign
Retail Mortgages
Qualifying Revolving Retail

0.0195
0.0013
0.0120
0.0369

0.406
0.406
0.262
0.558

0.0952
0.0013
0.0114
0.0350

0.737
0.737
0.627
0.852

0.1412
0.0013
0.0085
0.0262

0.827
0.827
0.7’44
0.915

0.2358
0.0013
0.0085
0.0172

0.720
0.720
0.657
0.787

Enterprises
Primary industries
Oil and gas
Mining
Construction
Retail trade, hotel and restaurant
Shipping abroad
Other transport
Property management
Commercial services

0.0292
0.0134
0.0108
0.0148
0.0233
0.0123
0.0256
0.0129
0.0135

0.406
0.406
0.406
0.406
0.406
0.406
0.406
0.406
0.406

0.0569
0.0217
0.0100
0.0227
0.0298
0.0198
0.0381
0.0180
0.0132

0.737
0.737
0.737
0.737
0.737
0.737
0.737
0.737
0.737

0.1452
0.0516
0.0167
0.0516
0.0639
0.0471
0.0829
0.0237
0.0344

0.827
0.827
0.827
0.827
0.827
0.827
0.827
0.827
0.827

0.2549
0.0910
0.0194
0.0871
0.0993
0.0831
0.1367
0.0132
0.0510

0.720
0.720
0.720
0.720
0.720
0.720
0.720
0.720
0.720

Equities

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

2009

2010

350% Risk weight

Table C.2
TTC risk parameters. Five-year-moving average PDs and LGDs, 2008–2011.
2008

2011

Exposure

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

Bank
Sovereign
Retail Mortgages
Qualifying Revolving Retail

0.0086
0.0013
0.0120
0.0369

0.361
0.361
0.181
0.552

0.0274
0.0013
0.0143
0.0439

0.438
0.438
0.274
0.612

0.0553
0.0013
0.0154
0.0472

0.534
0.534
0.391
0.685

0.1011
0.0013
0.0154
0.0473

0.608
0.608
0.490
0.732

Enterprises
Primary industries
Oil and gas
Mining
Construction
Retail trade, hotel and restaurant
Shipping abroad
Other transport
Property management
Commercial services

0.0214
0.0116
0.0119
0.0095
0.0240
0.0069
0.0165
0.0089
0.0161

0.361
0.361
0.361
0.361
0.361
0.361
0.361
0.361
0.361

0.0257
0.0119
0.0111
0.0123
0.0237
0.0096
0.0206
0.0105
0.0130

0.438
0.438
0.438
0.438
0.438
0.438
0.438
0.438
0.438

0.0505
0.0206
0.0122
0.0208
0.0316
0.0179
0.0343
0.0138
0.0172

0.534
0.534
0.534
0.534
0.534
0.534
0.534
0.534
0.534

0.0994
0.0369
0.0139
0.0369
0.0471
0.0337
0.0597
0.0152
0.0248

0.608
0.608
0.608
0.608
0.608
0.608
0.608
0.608
0.608

Equities

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

2009

2010

2011

Table C.3
TTC risk parameters. Ten-year-moving average PDs and LGDs, 2008–2011.
2008
Exposure

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

Bank
Sovereign
Retail Mortgages
Qualifying Revolving Retail

0.0058
0.0013
0.0120
0.0369

0.356
0.356
0.171
0.551

0.0150
0.0013
0.0124
0.0382

0.394
0.394
0.218
0.581

0.0290
0.0013
0.0126
0.0388

0.442
0.442
0.276
0.618

0.0523
0.0013
0.0126
0.0373

0.479
0.479
0.326
0.641

Enterprises
Primary industries
Oil and gas
Mining
Construction
Retail trade, hotel and restaurant
Shipping abroad
Other transport
Property management
Commercial services

0.0296
0.0116
0.0145
0.0104
0.0296
0.0094
0.0205
0.0097
0.0243

0.356
0.356
0.356
0.356
0.356
0.356
0.356
0.356
0.356

0.0331
0.0120
0.0140
0.0116
0.0295
0.0102
0.0212
0.0106
0.0229

0.394
0.394
0.394
0.394
0.394
0.394
0.394
0.394
0.394

0.0450
0.0157
0.0142
0.0157
0.0325
0.0131
0.0278
0.0122
0.0234

0.442
0.442
0.442
0.442
0.442
0.442
0.442
0.442
0.442

0.0672
0.0241
0.0146
0.0233
0.0386
0.0203
0.0390
0.0124
0.0252

0.479
0.479
0.479
0.479
0.479
0.479
0.479
0.479
0.479

Equities

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

153

Table C.4
Risk weighted assets for the ﬁve largest Norwegian banks and Nordea Bank Norge based on ﬁve-year-moving average PDs and LGDs. Millions of NOK, 2008–2011.
September 2008

2008

2009

2010

2011

Reported Basel II risk-weighted assets
Operational Risk
Market Risk
Pillar II
Retail mortgages
Qualifying revolving retail
Bank
Sovereign
Corporates
SME
Other retail
Equities
Residual

1295
67
46
27
124
24
120
4
56
147
105
67
508

0
56
50
28
142
24
127
4
59
157
112
68
533

0
57
49
0
236
29
214
4
72
189
136
66
703

0
59
48
0
351
34
319
5
100
264
189
65
958

0
63
48
0
441
37
456
6
133
348
242
65
1228

Total Basel II risk-weighted assets
Basel 1 risk-weighted assets

1295
1479

1360
1461

1756
1412

2393
1383

3067
1377

Table C.5
Risk weighted assets for the ﬁve largest Norwegian banks and Nordea Bank Norge based on ten-year-moving average PDs and LGDs. Millions of NOK, 2008–2011.
2008

2009

2010

2011

Reported Basel II risk-weighted assets
Operational Risk
Market Risk
Pillar II
Retail mortgages
Qualifying revolving retail
Bank
Sovereign
Corporates
SME
Other retail
Equities
Residual

September 2008
1295
67
46
27
124
24
102
4
59
155
111
67
509

0
56
50
28
134
24
106
4
61
162
116
68
525

0
57
49
0
172
25
163
4
66
174
125
66
606

0
59
48
0
218
27
216
4
80
212
152
65
727

0
63
48
0
252
27
282
5
97
254
180
65
856

Total Basel II risk-weighted assets
Basel 1 risk-weighted assets

1295
1479

1335
1461

1507
1412

1809
1383

2129
1377

Table C.6
TTC risk parameters. Twenty-year-moving average PDs and LGDs, 2008–2011.
2008

2009

2010

2011

Exposure

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

PD

LGD

Bank
Sovereign
Retail Mortgages
Qualifying Revolving Retail

0.0432
0.0013
0.0120
0.0369

0.353
0.353
0.167
0.550

0.0460
0.0013
0.0112
0.0344

0.373
0.373
0.191
0.566

0.0507
0.0013
0.0104
0.0318

0.396
0.396
0.219
0.584

0.0299
0.0013
0.0104
0.0289

0.414
0.414
0.243
0.596

Enterprises
Primary industries
Oil and gas
Mining
Construction
Retail trade, hotel and restaurant
Shipping abroad
Other transport
Property management
Commercial services

0.0840
0.0175
0.0188
0.0132
0.0422
0.0159
0.0316
0.0192
0.0429

0.353
0.353
0.353
0.353
0.353
0.353
0.353
0.353
0.353

0.0715
0.0174
0.0176
0.0121
0.0401
0.0163
0.0320
0.0190
0.0390

0.373
0.373
0.373
0.373
0.373
0.373
0.373
0.373
0.373

0.0639
0.0188
0.0167
0.0129
0.0381
0.0171
0.0346
0.0182
0.0358

0.396
0.396
0.396
0.396
0.396
0.396
0.396
0.396
0.396

0.0623
0.0217
0.0158
0.0156
0.0388
0.0195
0.0389
0.0167
0.0339

0.414
0.414
0.414
0.414
0.414
0.414
0.414
0.414
0.414

Equities

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

350% Risk weight

154

H. Andersen / Journal of Financial Stability 7 (2011) 138–154

Table C.7
Risk weighted assets for the ﬁve largest Norwegian banks and Nordea Bank Norge based on twenty-year-moving average PDs and LGDs. Millions of NOK, 2008–2011.
September 2008

2008

2009

2010

2011

Reported Basel II risk-weighted assets
Operational Risk
Market Risk
Pillar II
Retail mortgages
Qualifying revolving retail
Bank
Sovereign
Corporates
SME
Other retail
Equities
Residual

1295
67
46
33
124
24
197
4
71
186
132
67
346

0
56
50
33
131
24
203
4
73
193
137
68
354

0
57
49
0
140
23
212
4
73
191
136
66
360

0
59
48
0
152
22
230
4
79
207
148
65
383

0
63
48
0
159
21
206
4
87
229
163
65
395

Total Basel II risk-weighted assets
Basel 1 risk-weighted assets

1295
1479

1326
1461

1312
1412

1397
1383

1442
1377

References
Altman, E., Brady, B., Resti, A., Sironi, A., 2005. The link between default and recovery
rates: implications for credit risk models and procyclicality. Journal of Business
78 (6), 2203–2227.
Allen, L., Saunders, A., 2003. A survey of cyclical effects in the credit risk measurement models. BIS Working Paper, No. 126.
Andersen, H., 2008. Failure prediction of Norwegian banks: a logit approach. Working Paper 2/2008, Norges Bank.
Andersen, H., Berge, T.O., 2008. Stress testing of banks’ proﬁt and capital adequacy.
Economic Bulletin 2/2008, Norges Bank, pp. 47–57.
Andersen, H., Berg, S.A., Jansen, E.S., 2008. The dynamics of operating income in the
Norwegian banking sector. Working Paper 13/2008, Norges Bank.
Ayuso, J., Pérez, D., Saurina, J., 2004. Are capital buffers pro-cyclical? Evidence from Spanish Panel Data. Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 249–
264.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2006a. Results of the ﬁfth quantitative
impact study (QIS 5). BIS.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2006b. International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework. BIS.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2009. Strengthening the resilience of the
banking sector. BIS.
Benford, B., Nier, E., 2007. Monitoring cyclicality of Basel II capital requirements.
Financial Stability Paper No. 3, December.
Berge, T., Boye, K.G., 2007. Explaining the development in default by households and
ﬁrms. Economic Bulletin 1, Norges Bank.
Bernhardsen, E., Larsen, K., 2007. Modelling credit risk in the enterprise sector further development of the SEBRA model. Economic Bulletin 3, Norges Bank,
pp. 102–108.
Bikker, J., Metzemakers, P., 2004. Is bank capital procyclical? A Cross-Country Analysis. De Nederlandsche Bank Working Paper 009/2004.
Borio, C., Furﬁne, C., Lowe, P., 2001. Procyclicality of the ﬁnancial system and ﬁnancial stability: issues and policy options. BIS Paper, No. 1.
Bårdsen, G., Eitrheim, Ø., Jansen, E.S., Nymoen, R., 2005. The Econometrics of Macroeconomic Modelling. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bårdsen, G., Nymoen, R., 2008. Macroeconometric Modeling for Policy. Handbook
of Econometrics, vol II, Applied Econometrics. Palgrave-MacMillan.
Catarineu-Rabell, E., Jackson, P., Tsomocos, D.P., 2003. Procyclicality and the new
Basel accord – banks’ choice of loan rating system. Bank of England Working
Paper, no. 181.
Dierick, F., Pires, F., Scheicher, M., Spitzer, K.G., 2005. The new Basel Capital Framework and its implementation in the European Union. ECB Occasional Paper
series, No. 42, December.
Francis, W., Osborne, M., 2009. Bank regulation, capital and credit supply: Measuring
the impact of Prudential Standards. UK Financial Services Authority Occasional
Paper series, No. 36, September.

Goodhart, F., Hofmann, B., Segoviano, M., 2004. Bank regulation and macroeconomic
ﬂuctuations. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 20 (4), 591–615.
Gordy, M.G., Howells, B., 2006. Pro-cyclicality in Basel II: can we treat the disease
without killing the patient. Journal of Financial Intermediation 15 (3), 395–417.
Jacobsen, D.H., Kloster, T.B., 2005. What inﬂuences the number of bankruptcies?
Economic Bulletin 4/2005, Norges Bank, pp. 191-201.
Jacobsen, D.H., Naug, B.E., 2004. What inﬂuences the growth of household debt?
Economic Bulletin 3/2004, Norges Bank, pp. 103-111.
Jacobsen, D.H., Naug, B.E., 2005. What drives house prices? Economic Bulletin
1/2005, Norges Bank, pp. 29-41.
Jacobsen, D.H., Solberg-Johansen, K., Haugland, K., 2007. Housing investments and
house prices. Economic Bulletin 1/2007. Norges Bank, pp. 33-46.
Jakubik, P., Schmieder, C., 2008. Stress testing credit risk: comparison of the Czech
Republic and Germany. FSI Award 2008 Winning Paper, Bank for International
Settlements.
Jokipii, T., Milne, A., 2010. Bank capital buffer and risk adjustment decisions. Journal
of Financial Stability.
Jokivuolle, E, Virolainen, K., Vähämaa, O., 2008. Macro-model-based stress testing
of Basel II capital requirements. Discussion Papers 17/2008, Bank of Finland.
Kashyap, A.K., Stein, J.C., 2004. Cyclical implications of the Basel II standards. Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Quarter 1, pp. 18–31.
Marcelo, A., Scheicher, M., 2005. Capital requirements for corporate default risk. ECB
Mimeo.
Lindquist, K., 2004. Banks’ buffer capital: how important is risk? Journal of International Money and Finance 23 (3), 493–513.
Nordal. K.B., Syed, H., 2010. A model for predicting aggregated corporate credit risk.
Penger og Kreditt 1/10, Norges Bank.
Nier, E., Zicchino, L., 2005. Bank weakness and bank loan supply. Financial Stability
Review, December, pp 85–93.
Peura, S., Jokivuolle, E., 2004. Simulation based stress tests of banks’ regulatory
capital adequacy. Journal of Banking and Finance 28, 1801–1824.
Saurina, J., Trucharte, C., 2006. An assessment of Basel II procyclicality in mortgage
portfolios. Presented at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s 6th Annual
Bank Research Conference.
Stoltz, S., Wedow, M., in press. Banks’ regulatory capital buffer and the business
cycle: evidence for Germany. Journal of Financial Stability.
Taylor, A., Goodhart, C., 2006. Procyclicality and volatility in the ﬁnancial system:
the implementation of Basel II and IAS 39. In: Gerlach, S., Gruenwald, P. (Eds.),
Procyclicality of Financial Systems in Asia. IMF and Hong Kong Institute for
Monetary Research, Palgrave MacMillan, New York.
Vatne, B.H., 2007. Financial margins in Norwegian households – an analysis of micro
data for the period 1987–2003. IFC Bulletin No. 26, pp. 40–51, Bank for International Settlements.
Vatne, B.H., 2006. How large are the ﬁnancial margin of Norwegian Household? An
analysis of micro data for the period 1987–2004. Economic Bulletin 4, Norges
Bank, pp. 173–180.

