J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 619–620
www.elsevier.com/locate/jfi

Call for papers

The Financial Intermediation Research Society
announces a conference on

Banking, Corporate Finance, Asset Pricing
and Intermediation
June 5–8, 2008
Millennium Alaskan Hotel Anchorage ✩
Anchorage, Alaska
The Financial Intermediation Research Society (FIRS) is pleased to announce the third in a
series of biennial academic conferences it will organize on issues related to financial intermediation, and a broad range of issues in Finance. The first conference was held in Capri, Italy,
and the second in Shanghai, China. The format resembles that of the Western Finance Association conferences, covering a broad range of topics in parallel sessions. The topics will include
banking, corporate finance, asset pricing, market microstructure, insurance, securitization and
other topics. Both theoretical and empirical papers are encouraged. It is anticipated that most of
the participants will be from universities, central banks, regulatory agencies, and international
organizations.
A PDF file containing the paper should be submitted to the Program Chair, Professor Anjan
Thakor, using the link http://www.olin.wustl.edu/firs/anchorage/ by October 1, 2007. Authors
will be notified by January 15, 2008. Authors submitting papers should also indicate whether they
are willing to act as discussants or program chairs. There is a $40 submission fee for submitting
papers. Participants will be responsible for covering their own expenses to attend the conference.
The Program Advisory Council (PAC) for the 2008 meeting consists of Franklin Allen (University of Pennsylvania), Mark Flannery (University of Florida), Kose John (New York University), Maureen O’Hara (Cornell University) and Raghuram Rajan (University of Chicago). The
PAC will advise the Program Chair and the Associate Program Chair on the selection of papers
after the program committee has evaluated the papers. The Associate Program Chair is Guofu
Zhou, and the program committee consists of numerous leading researchers who will be asked
to evaluate each paper using a blind reviewing process.
✩

http://www.millenniumhotels.com/MCIL.nsf/lu_hoteldoc/120$$hotelDescription?opendocument.

1042-9573/2007 Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/S1042-9573(07)00061-7

620

Call for papers / J. Finan. Intermediation 16 (2007) 619–620

Non-stop flights are available from most major US cities to Anchorage. The hotel is a short
drive/cab ride from the airport. If you are planning to combine the conference with a family
vacation, we highly recommend taking a cruise on any major cruise liner from Vancouver to
Seward, Alaska. The cruise liner will transport you from Seward to Anchorage by bus. The
cruise, which takes a week, is spectacular in every respect. Early planning is recommended.
Details about FIRS can be found at www.finirs.org. The conference program and other information about the conference will be posted on this website as they become available.

