JOHN DUFFY
WEI XIAO

The Value of Interest Rate Stabilization Policies
When Agents Are Learning
We examine the expectational stability (E-stability) of rational expectations
equilibrium in the “New Keynesian” model where monetary policy is optimally derived and interest rate stabilization is added to the central bank’s
traditional objectives of inflation and output stabilization. We consider both
the case where the central bank lacks a commitment technology and the
case of full commitment. We show that for both cases, optimal policy rules
yield rational expectations equilibria that are E-stable for a wide range of
empirically plausible parameter values. These findings stand in contrast to
Evans and Honkapohja’s findings for optimal monetary policy rules in environments where interest rate stabilization is not a central bank objective.
JEL codes: D83, E43, E52
Keywords: learning, E-stability, monetary policy, New Keynesian model.

EVANS AND HONKAPOHJA (2003a, 2003b, 2006) examine the
stability, under adaptive learning dynamics, of rational expectations equilibrium
(REE) in the standard New Keynesian model of the monetary transmission mechanism1 when the policy rule of the central bank is optimally derived.2 Specifically,
they suppose that the central bank minimizes a quadratic loss function that penalizes
deviations of inflation and output from certain exogenous target values. The result

1. See Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999) for a presentation of this model.
2. Other authors, e.g., Bullard and Mitra (2002, 2003) and Carlstrom and Fuerst (2004), have studied
the stability of REE under learning for non-optimal, Taylor-type instrument rules. Honkapohja and Mitra
(2004) study the stability of REE under learning using both optimal and non-optimal policy rules.
We thank two referees and the editor, Ken West, for constructive comments and suggestions on earlier
drafts.

JOHN DUFFY is Professor of Economics, University of Pittsburgh, 230 S. Bouquet Street,
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 (E-mail: jduffy@pitt.edu). WEI XIAO is Assistant Professor of Economics,
State University of New York at Binghamton, P.O. Box 6000, Binghamton, NY 13902 (E-mail:
wxiao@binghamton.edu).
Received June 22, 2004; and accepted in revised form September 5, 2006.
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 39, No. 8 (December 2007)

C 2007 The Ohio State University

2042

:

MONEY, CREDIT AND BANKING

of this minimization problem is an optimal interest rate rule which is used together
with equations describing private sector behavior to characterize the equilibrium of
the economy.
Evans and Honkapohja (2003a, 2003b, 2006) report that, regardless of whether
the central bank operates under commitment or discretion, the REE of the system is
always expectationally unstable when the policy rule is derived under the incorrect
assumption that the private sector has rational expectations—they call the policy
rule in this case the “fundamentals-based” policy rule. While the private sector is
assumed to use a correctly specified model to form expectations, it does not initially
possess knowledge of the REE parameterization of the model; instead it updates
the parameters of its model in real time using all relevant data. However, the central
bank’s fundamentals-based interest rate policy causes this adaptive learning process to
diverge away from the REE, and for this reason, the fundamentals-based policy rule
is considered undesirable—it is expectationally unstable. 3 Evans and Honkapohja
(2003) find this instability of optimal policy “deeply worrying” and suggest that the
central bank might do well to assume that the private sector does not (initially) possess
rational expectations. Indeed, Evans and Honkapohja show that if the central bank
does not assume rational expectations on the part of the private sector, the resulting,
optimally derived, “expectations-based” interest rate rule, which conditions on the
private sector’s expectations of inflation and output, results in a REE that is always
expectationally stable.
In this paper, we consider an alternative approach to optimal monetary policy under
learning using the same New Keynesian framework and maintaining the assumption
that the private sector does not have rational expectations. We show that it is possible
for the central bank to use an optimally derived policy rule that does not condition on
private sector expectations and which results in a REE that is stable under adaptive
learning dynamics in contrast to the findings of Evans and Honkapohja (2003a, 2003b,
2006). What is needed to obtain our result is for the central bank to expand its loss
function to include interest rate stabilization as a third objective, in addition to the
traditional twin objectives of inflation and output stabilization. Our result concerning
the stability of REE under adaptive learning holds for a wide range of empirically
plausible parameter values across all calibrations found in the literature and regardless
of whether the central bank operates under discretion or commitment.
There are several advantages to studying optimal policy using a loss function that
gives weight to interest rate stabilization. First, as Woodford (2003) shows, if there
are transactions frictions of the type that would give rise to a demand for money then
an appropriate welfare-theoretic loss function for the central bank is one that includes
interest rate stabilization as a third objective in addition to the standard two objectives
of inflation and output stabilization. Second, there is substantial empirical evidence
that central banks adjust their interest rate targets only gradually over time—consistent
with having interest rate stabilization as a goal (see, e.g., Goodhart 1997). Finally,

3. See Evans and Honkapohja (2001) for a complete treatment of the notion of expectational (in)stability.

JOHN DUFFY AND WEI XIAO

:

2043

as Giannoni and Woodford (2003) note, the optimal policy rules derived under the
three-element loss function resemble the much-studied Taylor instrument rule, while
rules derived under the more typical two-element (inflation and output stabilization)
objective function do not.
Evans and Honkapohja’s proposed resolution to the monetary policy instability
problem—conditioning policy on private sector expectations—strikes us as problematic for several reasons. First, operationally speaking, the private sector’s expectations
may not be observable, or may be heterogeneous; figuring out which expectations to
use is a complicated task. Second, as Honkapohja and Mitra (2005) point out, if the
central bank is known to be conditioning policy on private sector expectations, the
private sector might choose to be strategic about its expectations. Third, in certain
environments, conditioning on private sector expectations may increase the likelihood
that the REE becomes indeterminate, as shown by Bernanke and Woodford (1997). 4
Our approach, which does not require the use of private sector expectations, avoids
these problems.
1. THE MODEL
The model of the private sector is the standard, “cashless” New Keynesian model
used in analyses of the monetary policy transmission mechanism (as set forth, e.g.,
in Clarida, Gali, and Gertler 1999 or Woodford 2003) and consists of the following
equations:
xt = −ϕ(i t − Ê t πt+1 ) + Ê t xt+1 + gt ,

(1)

πt = λxt + β Ê t πt+1 + u t ,

(2)




v t = (gt , u t ) = Fvt−1 + et ,

µ
F=
0


0
,
ρ

(3)

where |µ|, |ρ| ∈ (0, 1), e t = (e gt , e ut ) and e it ∼ i.i.d. (0, σ i2 ), i = g, u. The parameters ϕ
and λ are assumed to be positive, as is the discount factor, 0 < β < 1. The inter-temporal
IS equation (1) relates the output gap x t , to its expected future value Ê t xt+1 , and to
the real interest rate; i t is the short-term (one-period) nominal interest rate and Ê t πt+1
is the expected inflation rate between t and t + 1. The aggregate supply equation (2)
relates the current inflation rate π t to expected future inflation and the current output
gap. Both equations can be derived from explicit micro-founded models. Note that
Ê t here refers to expectations of future endogenous variables that are not necessarily
4. Evans and Honkapohja (2003a, 2003b) are careful to show that indeterminacy of REE is not a
problem when the central bank uses the optimally derived, expectations-based interest rate rules that
condition on private sector expectations. Berardi (2004) reconciles Evans and Honkapohja’s findings with
those of Bernanke and Woodford (1997).

2044

:

MONEY, CREDIT AND BANKING

rational. 5 The last equation (3) characterizes how the demand and supply shock
processes, g t and u t , evolve over time.
This model is closed by specifying how the central bank determines the short-term
nominal interest rate, i t . Suppose the central bank’s objective is to minimize:
E0

∞




β t (πt − π)2 + αx (xt − x)2 + αi (i t − i)2 ,

(4)

t=0

where π, x, and i represent target values for inflation, the output gap and the interest
rate. For simplicity, we henceforth set π = x = 0, though our results would not
change if we assumed nonzero values for these targets. The relative weights assigned
to output and interest rate stabilization are α x > 0 and α i > 0.
The loss function differs from the one considered by Evans and Honkapohja (2003a,
2003b, 2006) by the inclusion of the third, interest rate stabilization element; Evans
and Honkapohja have α i = 0. The three-element loss function we use has been given
a micro-founded welfare-economic justification by Woodford (1999). He shows that
when there are non-negligible transaction frictions, as would rationalize a demand for
money, the three-element version of the loss function objective represents a quadratic
approximation to the optimal, expected utility realized by the representative household
in the same optimizing model that gives rise to the structural equations (1) and (2); in
the absence of such transaction costs, the two-element version (α i = 0) is the relevant
approximation. Woodford (2003) further rationalizes the inclusion of the third term
as a quadratic approximation to the implicit penalty on interest rate variability the
central bank faces due to the existence of a zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates; the two-element version of the loss function does not take this constraint into
account. For these reasons, the three-element loss function can be viewed as the more
general form of the central bank’s objective function.

2. DISCRETIONARY POLICY
We first consider the case where the central bank cannot commit to future policies.
Optimal monetary policy in this discretionary case amounts to minimization of (4)
subject to versions of equations (1) and (2) modified to take account of the central
bank’s lack of commitment:
xt = −ϕi t ,

(5)

πt = λxt .

(6)

5. There is some dispute in the literature as to whether equations (1) and (2) represent the correct,
micro-founded structural equations of the model under this assumption of non-rational expectations (there
is no dispute in the case where agents do have rational expectations)—see the debate between Preston
(2004) and Honkapohja, Mitra, and Evans (2003) for the details. As our aim is to contrast our findings
with those of Evans and Honkapohja (2003a, 2003b, 2006), we chose to work with the same system of
structural equations (1) and (2) that they used.

JOHN DUFFY AND WEI XIAO

:

2045

The three first-order conditions can be combined to yield the optimality condition:
λπt + αx xt − αi ϕ −1 (i t − i) = 0.

(7)

Equation (7) can be rearranged to yield the optimal interest rate rule:
it = i +

ϕλ
ϕαx
πt +
xt .
αi
αi

(8)

The rule (8) is of the same general form as Taylor’s instrument rule, though in this
case it has been optimally derived. 6 The optimal rule (8) requires knowledge of the
contemporaneous values of inflation and output, and for this reason we will refer to
it as a “data-based” rule.
The system under discretionary policy thus consists of equations (1), (2), and (8).
Letting y t = (x t , π t ) , this system can be further reduced and written as:
yt = δ0 + δ y Ê t yt+1 + δv v t ,

(9)

where δ 0 , δ y , and δ v represent comformable vectors or matrices with elements that
are combinations of structural model parameters and objective function weights.
To study the stability of REE under adaptive learning, we follow Evans and
Honkapohja (2001, section 10.3) and suppose that agents have a perceived law of
motion for y t that corresponds to the minimal state variable (MSV) representation of
the REE solution to the system (9). This perceived law of motion may be written as:
yt = d0 + dv v t .

(10)

Using this perceived law of motion (PLM), agents form expectations of y t+1 :
Ê t yt+1 = d0 + dv Fvt .
Substituting these expectations into (9) (in lieu of rational expectations) yields a
T-mapping from the PLM to the actual law of motion (ALM):
yt = Td0 (d0 ) + Tdv (dv )v t .
The rational expectations solution consists of values d̄0 = Td0 (d̄0 ) and d̄v = Tdv (d̄v ).
Expectational (E)-stability of (d̄0 , d̄v ) is governed by local asymptotic stability of
the matrix differential equation:
d
(d0 , dv ) = T (d0 , dv ) − (d0 , dv ),
dτ

6. It is in this sense that our analysis differs from that of Bullard and Mitra (2002).

2046

:

MONEY, CREDIT AND BANKING

evaluated at the REE solution values. Specifically, the REE solution to the system (9)
is E-stable if the eigenvalues of
DT d0 = δ y ,
DT dv = δ y F,
have real parts less than unity. As Evans and Honkapohja (2003) point out, these
conditions correspond closely to whether or not the rational expectations equilibrium
of the system (9) is determinate; the condition for determinacy is that the eigenvalues
of δ y are all less than unity. Indeed, given the restrictions imposed on the matrix F it
is clear that in this case of discretionary policy, the determinacy and the E-stability
conditions exactly coincide. As Duffy (2003) shows, in the case of discretionary
policy we have:


ϕ(αi − λϕβ)
1 αi
δy =
,
(11)
ξ λαi ϕ(λαi + βϕαx ) + βαi
where ξ = α i + ϕ 2 (α x + λ2 ). Whether or not the eigenvalues of this matrix are all less
than unity depends on the calibration of the structural parameters of the model and the
weights chosen for the objective function, and so we turn to a numerical analysis later
on in Section 4. Duffy investigated the eigenvalues of this matrix for one calibration
of the model, due to Woodford (1999), but in this paper, we provide a more general
analysis, considering several different calibrations that have appeared in the literature
and allowing the values of the two weights, α x and α i in the central bank’s objective
function to vary over a grid of plausible values. In addition, Duffy did not consider
the more interesting case where the central bank operates under commitment, which
we address in the next section.
The difference between the optimal “data-based” interest rate rule (8) we derive
under discretionary policy and the optimal “fundamentals-based” rule derived by
Evans and Honkapohja (2003a) under discretionary policy is the key to understanding
our different stability findings under adaptive learning. In Evans and Honkapohja’s
model, α i = 0, so the optimality condition we derived above (7) reduces to: 7
λπt + αx xt = 0.

(12)

Since this optimality condition does not involve the interest rate, i t , Evans and
Honkapohja proceed to derive an optimal interest rate rule under the assumption
that the private sector has rational expectations. They suppose that the private sector
forms expectations of future output and inflation using an MSV solution of the form
given by (10), i.e., the same solution class we consider. Using this perceived law
of motion to form expectations in (1), (2), and using (12), they solve for the REE

7. Compare equation (6), p. 809 in Evans and Honkapohja (2003a).

JOHN DUFFY AND WEI XIAO

:

2047

coefficient values of the MSV solution and further obtain an optimal interest rate rule
of the form:
i t = ψi + ψg gt + ψu u t ,

(13)

where ψ i , ψ g , and ψ u are precisely defined coefficient values under the maintained assumption that the private sector has rational expectations. They call this
a “fundamentals-based” ruled because it is a function only of exogenous fundamentals, i.e., the two shocks. Evans and Honkapohja use (13) to eliminate i t in (1) and
write the system (1) and (2) in the form (9), where, in particular, they have that:


ϕ
1
δy =
.
(14)
β + λϕ λ
Their matrix for δ y , (14), which is critical to their E-stability analysis, is different
from the matrix (11) we derive using the data-based rule, and this difference is the
reason for our different stability findings, as detailed later. We note that we could
have proceeded in the same manner as Evans and Honkapohja (2003a), using the
optimality condition (7) (our data-based interest rate rule) to substitute out for i t in
equation (1) and then finding the MSV REE solution for π t and x t as functions of
the shocks g t and u t . We could have then substituted the REE solutions for π t and x t
back into our optimal data-based interest rate rule (8) to get a “fundamentals-based”
rule of the same form (13) used by Evans and Honkapohja; the ψ coefficients would
differ from those in Evans and Honkapohja due to our different objective function,
but the functional form of the rule would be the same. However, we already know,
from Proposition 2 of Evans and Honkapohja that any interest rate rule of the form
(13) will result in an E-unstable REE, irrespective of the coefficient values of that
rule; that finding is unaffected by our use of a different loss function.
Our contribution is to note that the addition of interest-rate stabilization to the
central banks’ policy objective allows for an optimal interest rate rule that is “databased” and quite distinct from the fundamentals-based rule of Evans and Honkapohja
(2003a). This rule is not obtainable if α i = 0 in the loss function objective of the central
bank as in Evans and Honkapohja’s analysis. 8 As noted above, a further important
difference is that Evans and Honkapohja need to assume that the central bank acts as
though the private sector has rational expectations in order to derive the central bank’s
optimal, fundamentals-based interest rate rule. In our approach, we do not need to
8. If one does not start by setting α i = 0 in the objective function, one could consider a version of the
optimal data-based rule we derive (8) in the limiting case where the weight on interest rate smoothing,
α i → 0:


ϕλ
ϕαx
i t = i + lim
πt +
xt .
αi →0
αi
αi
However, in this case the coefficients on the endogenous variables tend to infinity, so this version of the
rule is of little practical importance, though our simulations findings (discussed below) suggest that such
a rule would be E-stable.

2048

:

MONEY, CREDIT AND BANKING

make such an assumption in order to derive the optimal interest rate rule as this rule
(8) follows immediately from combining the first order conditions from the central
bank’s optimization problem. Finally, we wish to emphasize that data-based rules
seem more plausible as candidates for optimal policy rules than fundamental-based
rules that condition policy on exogenous shocks; despite the assumption that shock
“fundamentals” are known, in practice, such shocks are hard to identify and it seems
that central bankers do use endogenously determined variables (π t , x t ) in formulating
their policy decisions. The same logic which we have just given for the difference
in our findings from those of Evans and Honkapohja (2003a, 2003b, 2006) under
discretionary policy also extends to the case of policy under commitment. We now
turn to an analysis of that case.

3. POLICY UNDER COMMITMENT
If the central bank can credibly commit to future policies, the problem it faces
changes to reflect this possibility. In particular, we follow Woodford (2003) in adopting
the “timeless perspective” to optimal policy under commitment. This perspective
requires that the central bank minimizes (4) subject to the original private sector
equations, (1) and (2). The first order conditions can be manipulated to obtain the
optimal interest rate rule under commitment:
it = −

ϕλi
αx ϕ
ϕλ + β + 1
1
ϕλ
πt +
(xt − xt−1 ) +
+
i t−1 − i t−2 .
β
αi
αi
β
β

(15)

As noted by Giannoni and Woodford (2003), the optimal rule (15) closely resembles
a “policy-smoothing” version of the Taylor instrument rule, though (15) involves
greater history dependence (via the variables x t−1 , i t−2 ) than is typically assumed in
policy smoothing versions of Taylor rules. We note further that the rule (15) differs
from the optimal “fundamentals-based” rule under commitment studied by Evans and
Honkapohja (2003b, 2006). 9 The reason for this difference in the commitment case
is analogous to the reason we provided in the discretionary policy case; the use of the
two-element objective function does not immediately give rise to an optimal interest
rate rule and so Evans and Honkapohja (2006) need to assume rational expectations
on the part of the private sector in order to derive the optimal policy rule. With the
three-element objective function (4), we do not need to make such an assumption.
Using the optimal rule (15) to substitute out for i t in (1), we can reduce the system
to two equations in x t and π t . Defining y t = (x t , π t ) and w t = (i t , i t−1 ) , the system
under commitment can be written as:
yt = δ0 + δ y1 Ê t yt+1 + δ y2 yt−1 + δw w t−1 + δv v t .

(16)

9. Evans and Honkapohja’s (2006) optimal, “fundamentals-based” rule under commitment is i t =
ψ x x t−1 + ψg g t + ψu u t , where the ψ coefficients are precisely defined under the maintained assumption
of private sector rational expectations.

JOHN DUFFY AND WEI XIAO

:

2049

The interest rate rule (15) can also be written in matrix notation as
w t = a0 + a1 yt + a2 yt−1 + a3 w t−1 .

(17)

The PLM consistent with a MSV–REE solution in this case is:
yt = d0 + d y yt−1 + dw w t−1 + dv v t .

(18)

Given (18), (3), and (17), we obtain the expected value of y t+1 as:
Ê t yt+1 = d0 + d y yt + dw (a0 + a1 yt + a2 yt−1 + a3 w t−1 ) + dv Fvt .
Since there are two y t terms in this equation, we need to apply (18) one more time to
eliminate them. Doing this yields:
Ê t yt+1 = ψ0 + ψ y yt−1 + ψw w t−1 + ψv v t .
Substituting these expectations into (16), we get a T-mapping from the PLM to the
ALM:
yt = T (d0 ) + T (d y )yt−1 + T (dw )w t−1 + T (dv )v t .
Rather than calculate all possible REE solutions—there can be several fixed points
to the T-mapping in this case—we focus on the unique, saddle path stable solution
found using the Blanchard–Kahn technique (see, e.g., Evans and Honkapohja 2001,
section 10.8). This unique determinate equilibrium is the one relevant to policy discussions and, as Giannoni and Woodford (2003) show, it is the optimal equilibrium
from the timeless perspective.
The conditions for E-stability of the REE solution to the system (16) are given in
Evans and Honkapohja (2001, section 10.3). The conditions are that the eigenvalues
of the matrices DT d j , j = 0, y, w, v, all have real parts less than unity. The relevant
matrices are:
DT d0 = δ y1 (I + d y + dw a1 ),
DT d y = d y ⊗ δ y1 + I ⊗ (δ y1 d y + δ y1 dw a1 ),
DT dw = dw ⊗ δ y1 a1 + I  ⊗ δ y1 (d y + a1 dw + a3 ),
DT dv = δ y1 d y + δ y1 dw a1 + δ y1 F.
In the case of optimal policy under commitment, it is no longer the case that
determinacy and stability of equilibrium under adaptive learning are inextricably
linked; while we focus on the unique determinate REE, this equilibria may or may
not satisfy the E-stability conditions given above. Again, it is not possible to obtain
analytic results so we must resort to numerical methods to assess whether the REE in

2050

:

MONEY, CREDIT AND BANKING

TABLE 1
THREE VALUES OF THE STRUCTURAL PARAMETERS OF THE MODEL
Author

Woodford (1999)
Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999)
McCallum and Nelson (2000)

ϕ

λ

1/0.157
1
0.164

0.024
0.3
0.3

the commitment case are stable under adaptive learning. We now turn to this numerical
exercise.

4. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
The calibrated values of the structural model parameters we consider in our numerical exercise are due to Woodford (W) (1999), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (CGG)
(1999), and McCallum and Nelson (MN) (2000) and are given in Table 1.
We further assume that ρ = µ = 0.35 in (3) for all three model calibrations.
We consider whether the REE is E-stable or not for each of the three structural
model calibrations and for both discretionary and commitment regimes—a total of
six numerical exercises. For each exercise, we vary each of the loss function weights
α i and α x , over a fine grid of values, ranging from 0.001 to 2, with a step size of
0.04. 10
4.1 Numerical Findings Under Discretionary Policy
Figures 1–3 show our numerical findings under discretionary policy for the three
calibrations given in Table 1 for various (α x , α i ) weight pairs. For each weight pair,
our numerical routine checks the eigenvalues of the matrix δ y , (11), to determine
whether either eigenvalue has real part less than unity. Regions where all eigenvalues
have real parts less than unity are shown in black; in this case, the REE is both
E-stable and determinate. Regions where at least one eigenvalue has a real part greater
than unity are left blank; these are the regions where the REE is both E-unstable and
indeterminate.
The figures reveal that for all three calibrations there always exist (α x , α i ) combinations for which the REE solution is E-stable and determinate. This finding stands
in contrast to Evans and Honkapohja’s finding of E-instability for the fundamentalsbased rule under discretion derived under the assumption that α i = 0. Of course, Evans
and Honkapohja’s result holds for any choice of weights/calibration of the model and

10. We conducted a further numerical analysis (not illustrated here), where we searched over all combinations of the two weights in the interval [0.001, 0.01] using a step size of .01; the results are equivalent
to those illustrated below when each weight is set equal to .01; i.e., in all of these cases, the REE is E-stable.

JOHN DUFFY AND WEI XIAO

FIG. 1. Discretionary Policy, Woodford (1999) Calibration.

FIG. 2. Discretionary Policy, Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999) Calibration.

:

2051

2052

:

MONEY, CREDIT AND BANKING

FIG. 3. Discretionary Policy, McCallum and Nelson (2000) Calibration.

our finding applies only for certain weight choices that are not independent of the
model calibration.
Woodford (1999) proposes the weights α x = 0.047 and α i = 0.233. With these
choices, and the Woodford (W) calibration of the structural parameters, Figure 1
reveals that the REE is both E-stable and determinate. Woodford (2003, table 6.1)
proposes somewhat different weights of α x = 0.048 and α i = 0.077 under the same
W calibration of the structural parameters. In that case the REE is again found to
be both E-stable and determinate. As Figure 1 reveals, determinacy and E-stability
obtain for all values of α x so long as α i is not too great. This same conclusion holds
for the other two calibrations (CGG, MN) as seen in Figures 2 and 3. The range of (α x ,
α i ) pairs for which E-stability obtains is greatest in the W calibration, and smallest in
the MN calibration. However, there is always some (α x , α i ) pair for which the REE
is E-stable and determinate.
4.2 Numerical Findings Under Commitment
Figures 4–6 show comparable results for the case of optimal policy under commitment. 11 To assess E-stability, we again used a fine grid of values for the weight pairs
(α x , α i ), allowing each weight to vary over the range [0, 2].
11. Recall that for this case, we restricted attention to the unique, determinate, saddlepath stable REE
since, in the commitment case, the conditions for E-stability and determinacy of equilibrium need not
coincide.

JOHN DUFFY AND WEI XIAO

FIG. 4. Commitment Policy, Woodford (1999) Calibration.

FIG. 5. Commitment Policy, Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999) Calibration.

:

2053

2054

:

MONEY, CREDIT AND BANKING

FIG. 6. Commitment Policy, McCallum and Nelson (2000) Calibration.

However, for the CGG and MN parameterizations, we had to extend the range of
admissible weights so we can illustrate regions where E-stability fails to hold. In
particular, for those two calibrations, we search for values of α x over [0, 7] and we
search for values of α i over [0, 5], where again, the step size is 0.04. For each weight
pair, we assess whether all the eigenvalues of the matrices DT d j , j = 0, y, w, v, have
real parts less than unity so that the REE is E-stable; such regions are shown in black.
Regions where one or more eigenvalue has a real part greater than unity are left blank,
indicating regions where the REE is E-unstable.
Figures 4–6 confirm that in the commitment case, there always exist (α x , α i ) pairs
such that the REE is E-stable. Moreover, for the CGG and MN calibrations, the
set of policy weight pairs for which E-stability holds is much less restrictive under
commitment than under discretion. For the W calibration, Figure 4 reveals that the
weights proposed by Woodford (1999) α x = 0.047 and α i = 0.233, are consistent with
an E-stable REE. This finding also holds for Woodford’s (2003) alternative weights,
α x = 0.048 and α i = 0.077.
However, like Figures 1–3, Figures 4–6 reveal that there exist (α x , α i ) pairs for
which the REE is E-unstable; the precise regions depend on the calibration of the
structural model parameters. These E-unstable regions do not appear to be empirically relevant, though the literature is not so clear about empirically plausible weight
choices. Nevertheless, our finding is not a strong the one found in Evans and Honkapohja (2006); they show that an optimally derived, expectation-based interest rate rule

JOHN DUFFY AND WEI XIAO

:

2055

that has the central bank condition on private sector expectations always implements
an E-stable REE, regardless of parameter values. Still, our finding that there exist
parameter regions under which an optimal interest rate rule that does not condition on
private sector expectations can nevertheless implement an E-stable REE is of interest,
as Evans and Honkapohja are unable to show such a result using the two-element loss
function objective.

5. CONCLUSIONS
We have show that if central bankers give some weight to interest rate stabilization, the resulting optimal policy rule implements a REE that is E-stable for several
calibrations found in the literature under either discretionary or commitment policy
regimes. This result obtains without the assumption that the private sector has rational
expectations or that the central bank conditions its policy on private sector expectations, in contrast to the findings of Evans and Honkapohja (2003a, 2003b, 2006).
While Evans and Hokapohja called the instability under learning of their optimal,
fundamentals-based rule “deeply worrying,” our findings suggest that learnability of
REE need not conflict with optimization of an appropriately defined policy objective
function. Indeed, Evans and Honkapohja’s proposed solution—the conditioning of
policy on private sector expectations—is problematic, as such expectations are likely
to be unobservable or heterogeneous and such conditioning might lead to gaming on
the part of the private sector or indeterminacy of the REE.
Our finding differs from Evans and Honkapohja’s because the optimal interest
rate rule derived under the assumption that α i > 0 closely resembles Taylor-type,
“instrument rules,” where the interest rate responds to contemporaneous and/or lagged
values of the endogenous variables (inflation, the output gap, interest rates), and not
to exogenous disturbance terms as in Evans and Honkapohja (2003a, 2003b, 2006).
Bullard and Mitra (2002) show that, under certain conditions, Taylor-type instrument
rules can implement E-stable REE, and it seems this finding carries over to optimally
derived policy rules that resemble Taylor rules. We conclude that the value of interest
rate stabilization as a central bank objective is that it may aid private sector learning
of the rational expectations equilibrium relative to the case where this objective is
absent.

LITERATURE CITED
Berardi, Michele. (2004) “Should Monetary Policy Respond to Private Expectations?” Working
Paper.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Woodford. (1997) “Inflation Forecasts and Monetary Policy.”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 29, 653–84.
Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra. (2002) “Learning About Monetary Policy Rules.” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 49, 1105–129.

2056

:

MONEY, CREDIT AND BANKING

Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra. (2003) “Determinacy, Learnability, and Monetary Policy
Inertia.” Working Paper No. 2000-030, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Carlstrom, Charles T., and Timothy S. Fuerst. (2004) “Learning and the Central Bank.” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 51, 327–38.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. (1999) “The Science of Monetary Policy: A
New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 1661–707.
Duffy, John. (2003) “Comment on ‘Adaptive Learning and Monetary Policy Design.’ ” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, 35, 1073–79.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja. (2001) Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja. (2003a) “Expectations, and the Stability Problem
for Optimal Monetary Policies.” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 807–24.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja. (2003b) “Adaptive Learning and Monetary Policy
Design.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 35, 1045–72.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja. (2006) “Monetary Policy, Expectations and Commitment.” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 108, 15–38.
Giannoni, Marc P., and Michael Woodford. (2003) “How Forward-Looking Is Optimal Monetary Policy?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 35, 1425–69.
Goodhart, Charles A.E. (1997) “Why Do the Monetary Authorities Smooth Interest Rates?”
In European Monetary Policy, edited by S. Collignon, pp. 119–74. Washington, DC: Pinter.
Honkapohja, Seppo, and Kaushik Mitra. (2004) “Are Non-Fundamental Equilibria Learnable
in Models of Monetary Policy?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 1743–770.
Honkapohja, Seppo, and Kaushik Mitra. (2005) “Performance of Monetary Policy with Internal
Central Bank Forecasting.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 29, 627–58.
Honkapohja, Seppo, Kaushik Mitra, and George W. Evans. (2003) “Notes on Agents’ Behavioral Rules Under Adaptive Learning and Recent Studies of Monetary Policy.” Working
Paper.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson. (2000) “Timeless Perspective vs. Discretionary
Monetary Policy in Forward–Looking Models.” Working Paper.
Preston, Bruce. (2004) “Adaptive Learning and the Use of Forecasts in Monetary Policy.”
Working Paper.
Woodford, Michael. (1999) “Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia.” Working Paper.
Woodford, Michael. (2003). Interest and Prices. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

