Journal of Financial Intermediation 9, 184–212 (2000)
doi:10.1006/jfin.2000.0285, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Indicating Ahead: Best Execution and the
NASDAQ Preopening1
Conrad S. Ciccotello
Georgia State University

and
Frank M. Hatheway
The Pennsylvania State University

Dealers enter nonbinding expressions of interest during the Nasdaq preopening to promote price discovery and ease stock inventory management when the market opens. But does
this practice of “indicating ahead” constitute best execution for an individual customer? Arguments in favor of the practice rely on the notion that best execution is a general condition
as opposed to a concept applicable on a trade-by-trade basis. Some customers must sacrifice
in individual instances to improve the functioning of the overall market. But the practice
of indicating ahead violates the dealer agent’s duty of loyalty to her individual customer.
Moreover, the dealer’s financial self-interest is best served by indicating ahead. Journal of
C 2000 Academic Press
Economic Literature Classification Numbers: G10, G18, K22. °

1. INTRODUCTION
This paper introduces a new question into the best execution literature in law and
finance. We ask whether “indicating ahead” violates the dealers’ fiduciary duty of
1 Corresponding author is Conrad S. Ciccotello, Department of Risk Management and Insurance,
Georgia State University, P.O. Box 4036, Atlanta, GA 30302-4036. Fax: (404) 651-4219. Part of
this paper was completed while Ciccotello was visiting Pennsylvania State University and Hatheway
was visiting the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Securities and Exchange Commission,
as a matter of policy, disclaims responsibility for any private publication or statement by any of its
employees. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Commission or of the author’s colleagues upon the staff of the Commission. The authors
are grateful to Joel Hasbrouck, Erik Sirri, Jeff Smith, and seminar participants at the JFI/Cornell
Symposium, Pennsylvania State University, George Washington University, and the Washington Area
Finance Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Bridge Information Systems
for providing access to the Nasdaq data. Mike Chernov provided invaluable research assistance.

184
1042-9573/00 $35.00

c 2000 by Academic Press
Copyright °
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

NASDAQ PREOPENING

185

best execution. Indicating ahead refers to the practice of entering indicative, rather
than firm, quotes to reflect imbalances in buy and sell orders during the Nasdaq
preopening period. An analysis of the law and finance issues associated with the
preopening extends the literature on best execution, which has mainly focused on
the price obtained for a customer’s transaction while the market is open.
The practice of indicating ahead provides an opportunity to study the blurring
line between markets and institutions highlighted by the conflicting duties of the
dealer. Nasdaq dealers, who are allegedly competitors, effectively act as a single
organization to open the market. We examine whether the potential improvements
in overall market function obtained through dealers’ preopening coordination of
price should constitute best execution and override the potential costs to a subset of
individual customers. Arguably, the practice of indicating ahead subverts a dealer’s
duty to individual customers in favor of a duty to the market at large. The issue is
made more complicated as a Nasdaq dealer customarily takes the other side of the
customer’s order. So the dealer’s self-interest may also be best served by indicating
ahead.
To understand the economic impact of this practice, we examine several empirical issues. They include: Does indicating ahead result in identifiable costs to
investors? Is the price based on the preopening unbiased and efficient? Do the different types of preopening behavior by wholesale versus integrated broker dealers
reveal self-interest?
To address these questions, we use one year of dealer quotations on 52 Nasdaq
stocks during the 90 min prior to the start of trading at 9:30 a.m. We find that the
Nasdaq preopening is capable of identifying the informationally unbiased price
during the preopening. However, a wedge is driven between the informationally
unbiased price and the opening price in the final minutes of the preopening. For
days with light opening trading volume, there is strong evidence of price reversals
following the opening.
Because of the preopening, an informed investor whose individual order creates an imbalance during the preopening may be made worse off for that trade
than if indicative quotes had not been disclosed. Further, dealers benefit both from
obtaining potentially valuable information about inventory shocks and from realizing the spread at reduced inventory risk. Indicating ahead is thus unlike other
trading protocols, such as preferencing or internalization. Rather than resulting
in best execution for an individual order, but raising trading costs in the overall
market, indicating ahead facilitates the determination of the equilibrium price for
the market as a whole, but raises the costs of trading for some customers’ orders.
Our legal analysis of best execution in the preopening relies on the rules, prior
cases, and literature that frame a dealer’s fiduciary duties. Fueled by high-profile
cases such as Manning,2 dealers’ duties are the subject of a growing literature in
law and finance. Macey and O’Hara (1997) summarize the law and economics
2 E. F. Hutton & Co., CCH Fed. Sec. L. Rep. 89,303 (S.E.C. Rel., No. 25887, July 6, 1988).
(Hereinafter, “The Manning Case”.)

186

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

considerations of the fiduciary duty of best execution. They argue that best execution eludes legal definition; as such, an exact determination of dealers’ legal
obligations is problematic. The adjudication of best execution disputes reflects the
unsettled law, often turning on the case-specific assessments of harm, process, and
disclosure.3 Manning, for example, was a successful customer plaintiff because he
was found to be an unsophisticated investor who could demonstrate damages.4
The rules that apply to the preopening are important to frame the legal context
for the customer and dealer arguments that are made later in the paper. Since 1987,
there has been no explicit mention of the preopening in the NASD manual. But the
recent disciplinary proceeding NASDR Market Regulation Committee v. Morgan
Stanley5 indicates that the standards of fiduciary duty that apply during regular
trading hours should be applied to the preopening unless specifically exempted.
In the Morgan Stanley proceeding, NASDR found that preopening quotations
affected subsequent execution prices; therefore, preopening quotes could be considered part of an attempt to manipulate markets.6 Morgan Stanley establishes a
link between preopening quotations and opening prices that our empirical analysis
confirms. To evaluate the legal arguments that the practice of indicating ahead
constitutes best execution, we rely on Morgan Stanley’s extension of the standards
of duty from the trading day to the preopening.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 contains a discussion of
role of the preopening and the empirical results. Section 3 presents the arguments for the customer against the practice of indicating ahead. Section 4 is the
dealers’ rebuttal. Section 5 outlines the potential regulatory alternatives to address this issue. Section 6 summarizes the arguments and evidence and offers
conclusions.
2. THE NASDAQ PREOPENING
This section describes the institutional features of the Nasdaq preopening and
presents the empirical results of the paper. After describing the salient aspects of
Nasdaq, we turn to a discussion of the role of the preopening and the motivation of
dealers in displaying indicative quotes. An example of the preopening follows for
illustrative purposes. The last part of this section contains the empirical results.
2.1. Economic Significance of the Nasdaq Preopening
Nasdaq is an electronic multidealer market that opens for trading at 9:30 a.m.
During the trading period, dealers are required to display their bid and ask prices.
The highest bid and the lowest ask on the system form the reported market quote at
3

The Perils of Payment for Order Flow, 107 Harvard Law Review 1675 (1994).
See Manning, supra, at note 2. The dissent took issue with whether Manning was unsophisticated.
5 NASD Notices to Members—Disciplinary Actions, May 1998, NASD Regulation Sanctions
Morgan Stanley and Seven Traders.
6 Ibid.
4

NASDAQ PREOPENING

187

any point in time. For the stocks in this study, dealers must individually post their
prices at a minimum quantity of 1000 shares throughout trading hours. Trades may
be executed against the posted quotes using one of several electronic systems or
via telephone.
The Nasdaq quotation reporting system is activated starting at about 8:00 each
trading day. During the 90-min preopening period, dealers can (but are not required
to) display their bid and ask prices. One key difference from the trading period is
that the prices quoted during the preopening are indicative and hence nonbinding.
They do not have to be honored at any minimum or posted quantity, as must be
done during trading hours. More directly, there is no chance of execution of the
order on Nasdaq at that time.
Since the preopening quotes are indicative, and alternative systems (such as
Instinet) exist for posting firm quotes, why would dealers post preopening quotes
on Nasdaq? It is possible that quotes in the preopening are an indication of a
willingness to trade on another market such as Instinet. However, dealers are
reluctant to trade during the preopening and trading volume is light.7 The trading
that does occur tends to be concentrated immediately before the opening of the
Nasdaq market. Instead, the evidence suggests that the quotes are indicative and
used by dealers in signaling an order imbalance. The industry perspective is that
preopening quotes change the NBBO by raising the bid or lowering the ask to
reflect demand or supply for a stock. Specifically:
‘in the absence of a mechanism to disseminate order imbalances (as exists for exchange listed
stocks), upticking was the only means available to communicate...demand’8

Dealer incentives are relevant to an analysis of whether the practice of indicating
ahead constitutes best execution. What economic incentives do dealers have for
using nonbinding quotes to signal price changes? Several motives for publicizing
trading interest have been identified in the literature. Farrell (1995) describes a
central insight from the theory of communication games as a receiver of a signal
changes his actions in a way that is both to his benefit and to that of the sender.
Any assessment of the best execution role of the preopening will be closely linked
to determining whether dealers indicate ahead for the benefit of investors or for
their own benefit.
Admati and Pfleiderer (1991) propose a model implying that dealers’ price
signals benefit their investor customers. They show that if uninformed investors
can credibly preannounce their buying (selling) interest, they reduce trading costs
not only for themselves, but for certain other liquidity traders as well. Under this
model, dealers’ preopening quotes would serve their customers as a means of
searching for the other side of buying (selling) interest. Quotes would also be
generally uninformative about permanent changes in the equilibrium price.
7

Ibid.
NASDR v. Morgan Stanley, Decision Proceeding No. CMS 960235, April 13, 1998, pp. 59–60,
63–64.
8

188

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

Alternatively, Biais et al. (1999) argue that the opening price is a public good.
Dealers cooperate in this model to produce price discovery. The means for enforcing long-term production of price discovery is some form of “punishment” within
the dealer community through their repeated interaction in the marketplace. As
envisioned by Biais et al., dealers signal for the benefit of all market participants
and the preopening quotes would be informative about overnight changes in the
equilibrium price.
Finally, Cao et al. (1999) extend the reasoning of Biais et al. by adding preferenced order flow to reputational arguments. They claim that balancing supply
and demand is the optimal outcome for an informed dealer in the Nasdaq preopen.
They also note the suggestion of Madhavan and Dutta (1997) that the stability of the
registered dealer community in a stock makes for a repeated game where reputation
may limit the ability of informed dealers to take advantage of their information by
trading against their fellow dealers.9 In the Cao et al. setting, dealers signal for the
benefit of dealers and preopening quotes are informative.
Conclusively identifying which characterization most accurately describes the
Nasdaq preopening requires confidential order and counterparty information and
is outside the scope of this study. Nevertheless, the empirical properties of the
preopening described in the following sections make inferences about dealer motivations possible. Sections 3 and 4 will then interpret the Section 2 results in the
context of best execution.
2.2. A Specific Example
To demonstrate the economic impact of preopening quotations, we first use an
example. In Fig. 1, we display the bid–ask and the midpoint of individual dealer
quotes as well as the best bid–ask quotes during the preopening for Microsoft
(MSFT) on December 8, 1995. On the previous trading day, December 7, Microsoft had closed at $90 5/8–90 3/4. On the 8th, the stock would rise to $94
1/8–94 5/8. At 8:22 a.m., the Nasdaq computers recorded the initial best bid–ask
quote of the day, repeating the previous day’s closing quote of $90 5/8–90 3/4.
Seventeen minutes later, Morgan Stanley & Co. posted the first dealer quote of the
day, crossing10 the market and raising the best bid $1/4 to $90 7/8. Within the next
minute, Bear, Stearns & Co. raised the best bid another $1/8. Eight minutes later
Weeden & Co. raised the best bid by $1/8 to $91 1/8, and Morgan Stanley & Co.
raised the bid by $3/8.
Microsoft, with a market capitalization of $51 billion, was up $7/8 31 min
after the Nasdaq system came on. Over that 31 min, 12,000 shares had traded on
alternative trading systems such as Instinet. Close to 9 million shares would trade
during the day. At this point seven different dealers had entered their quotes into the

9 The SEC’s Section 21(a) Report adds further insights into the role of reputation on dealers’ willingness to trade with certain counterparties.
10 A “crossed” market is one where the bid price is greater than the ask price.

FIG. 1. Individual market maker quotes and market quotes during the preopening for Microsoft Corporation (December 8, 1995). The initial dealer
locked quote was recorded by Morgan Stanley. The figure shows how changes in the quotes of one market maker can dominate the preopening. Morgan
Stanley’s quotes will increase the best bid three times and cause $7/8 of the $1 7/8 price change which occurred on the preopening.

NASDAQ PREOPENING

189

190

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

Nasdaq system. In the 37 min left in the preopening, the best bid would rise four
more times in establishing the opening bid of $92 1/2. Overall, Morgan Stanley
would increase the best bid quote three times and account for $7/8 of the $1 7/8
increase during the preopening. The opening best bid–ask quote of $92 1/2–92 5/8
appears to have been a reasonable estimate of the equilibrium price as the 11 A.M.
trade prices were in the range $92 3/4–93 1/4. Through a series of quote changes,
Nasdaq dealers had established a new equilibrium price with which to start the
trading day.
2.3. Importance to Price Discovery
While the Microsoft example is an interesting anecdote, a more formal analysis
of the preopening is warranted. We proceed as follows. After a description of the
data set, we document dealers’ activity during the preopening. Regression and correlation analyses then test the informational efficiency of the Nasdaq preopening
quotes. We then estimate the same regression using the 25% of the sample days with
the largest overnight price change for each stock. Last, we document the relative importance of individual Nasdaq dealers to the price discovery during the preopening.
Two intraday data sets are used to conduct our empirical analysis. The first is
the Nasdaq preopening data obtained from Bridge Information Services.11 The
sample period extends from October 1, 1995 through September 30, 1996.12 The
preopening data set contains (1) individual market maker quotes including the
identifying market maker code, and (2) the inside quotes (i.e., the best bid–ask
prices), which are updated when the best individual market maker quotes (either
the bid, the ask, or both) change. Both quotes are time-stamped to the nearest minute
and are recorded in chronological sequence within each minute. Additional data
are obtained from the Trade and Quote (TAQ) database compiled by the New York
Stock Exchange.
Our sample consists of the 52 most active stocks among the 3772 Nasdaq
National Market (NNM) issues, as measured by 1994 share volume. These stocks
are also among the largest on Nasdaq as there is a high correlation between trading activity and market capitalization. Hence, our analysis includes major Nasdaq
stocks such as Microsoft, Intel, Cisco Systems, and Biogen. As five stocks switched
to other markets or were otherwise delisted from Nasdaq during the sample period, additional stocks were added in order of 1994 share volume to maintain the
sample size. Thus, the final sample includes 52 stocks, most of which have about
252 trading days during the sample period.
Table 1 contains summary statistics for dealer quote activity during the preopening. A number of dealers are active during the preopening with a cross-sectional
average of 22 dealers submitting quotes each day. Table 1 shows that the frequency

11

We thank Bridge Information Services for providing access to the Nasdaq data.
This sample period is after the disclosures of odd-eighths avoidance by Christie and Schultz
(1994), and prior to the Order Disclosure Rules of 1997. Further, the order disclosure rules, Rules
11Ac1-1 to 11Ac1-4, do not apply to the preopening.
12

191

NASDAQ PREOPENING

TABLE 1
Summary Statistics of 52 of the Most Active Nasdaq Stocks during the Preopening and Trading

Sample

Daily Daily Daily dealer
no. of no. of
preopen Before
trades dealers
quotes
8:30 8:30–8:45 8:45–9:00 9:00–9:15 9:15–9:30

Full sample
1294
Quartile 1
223
(least active)
Quartile 2
638
Quartile 3
1269
Quartile 4
3048
(most active)

22
13

55
25

5
4

2
1

3
2

9
5

36
13

18
24
32

38
60
96

4
5
6

1
2
3

2
4
5

6
10
15

25
39
67

Note. For each stock, the reported numbers are (1) daily average number of trades, (2) daily average
number of dealers during the preopening, (3) daily average number of dealer quotes during the preopening, and (4) daily average number of dealer quotes during various intervals in the preopening. The
sample period extends from October 1, 1995 through September 30, 1996. The numbers of dealers,
preopening dealer quotes, and preopening market quotes are from the Bridge data set. The numbers
of trades are from the TAQ database. The sample stocks are partitioned into four quartiles and sorted
according to daily average number of trades.

of dealer quotes increases during the last 15 min of the pre-opening (from 9:15–
9:30 a.m.). More active quartiles have more quotes between 8:30 and 9:15 than
less active quartiles. Activity in the last 15 min is concentrated at the end of the
interval. During that time, the quote frequency is comparable to the trading day.
Figure 2 shows that for the least actively traded stocks (quartile 1), a very small
percentage of dealers average more than one quote per day. For the most actively

FIG. 2. Distribution of dealer quotes. We calculate the average number of preopening quotes per
market maker for each of the 52 sample stocks. We then calculate the percentage of market makers for
each stock with an average frequency of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 preopening quotes per day. The percentages
are then averaged across stocks for each quote frequency. The sample period extends from October 1,
1995 through September 30, 1996. The sample stocks are partitioned into four quartiles and sorted
according to daily average number of trades. Quartile 1 is the least active; quartile 4 the most active.

192

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

FIG. 3. Percentage of price changes greater than one-eighth. Using sample data from 52 Nasdaq
stocks from October 1, 1995 to September 30, 1996, this figure shows the percentage of price changes
during the preopening that are greater than one-eighth. The percentages are computed for discrete
time periods. The results are based on the 12 top market makers in terms of the frequency with which
they change the market quote. Based on a test for differences in proportion, the percentage of changes
greater than one-eighth before 8:30 is significantly greater than that for any of the other periods at the
5% level. N is the number of price changes per time period.

traded stocks (quartile 4), the distribution of individual dealer quotes is more
uniform. Some dealers typically submit no more than a single preopening quote
near the start of trading. Others submit an average of up to five preopening quotes
per day with their first quote usually occurring prior to 9 a.m.
Although the frequency of dealer quotes increases as 9:30 approaches, the magnitude of the changes in the market quote decreases. Figure 3 shows that over 95%
of the changes in the market quote are one-eighth or less in the final 5 min of the
preopening whereas less than 33% are smaller than one-eighth in the first 15 min.
Larger price changes tend to occur early in the preopening when fewer dealers are
quoting. Cao et al. (1999) show that these large price changes, occurring early in
the preopening, contribute significantly to price discovery.
Turning to the informational properties of the preopening, the question is whether
the price based on the preopening is unbiased and efficient. Using the regression
technique of Biais (1999),13 Fig. 4 shows that the preopening price measured by
quotes between 9:00 and 9:25 A.M. is unbiased with a regression coefficient statistically equal to one. However, a bias is identified as occurring at 9:29 a.m. and
lasting approximately until 10:15 a.m. Figure 4 also shows that prices as measured
by trades occurring on alternative trade systems such as Instinet are more biased
than prices measured by Nasdaq preopening quotes.14
13 The application of the approach of Biais et al. (1999) to Nasdaq is discussed in Chernov and
Hatheway (1999).
14 We also estimated the regressions in Fig. 4 using the 3:00 p.m. price as the equilibrium.The results
are very similar to those in Fig. 4, so we did not include them.

NASDAQ PREOPENING

193

FIG. 4. Unbiasedness of the quote and trade prices. The unbiasedness of the prices observed
during the preopening is tested by constructing a sample of preopening and closing trade and quote
data for 52 active Nasdaq stocks from October, 1995 to September, 1996. Then the following expression
is estimated: V11 − Pclose = α + β(Pt − Pclose ) + εt . Here V11 is the true value of the stock assumed
to be the 11 a.m. price, Pt is the price at time t, and Pclose is the previous day’s closing price. The
regression is estimated twice with all preopening prices measured as either the quote price or the trade
price. The quote price is measured as the most recent midquote (or the most recent bid or ask price if
the market is locked or crossed) prior to the indicated time. The trade price is measured as the most
recently reported trade price prior to the indicated time. If the preopening is unbiased, the estimated
value of β should be equal to one.

Figure 5 repeats the analysis for top quartile of close to open price changes for
each stock in the sample and further partitions the results based on the trading
volume in the first 5 min of trading. The heaviest volume quartile (quartile 4)
shows the least evidence of bias in the preopening quotes. As volume decreases,
the extent of the bias increases and is consistent with the preopening price change
being greater than the close to 11 a.m. price change. Interestingly, the extent of the
bias increases as 9:30 a.m. approaches for all the volume quartiles.
Figures 4 and 5 suggest a bias in preopening quotes. We test for a direction of the
bias in Table 2. This table presents the correlation coefficients between the close-toopen price change and the open-to-11 A.M. price change. A correlation coefficient
estimate of zero would indicate that the preopening prices are efficient with no
predictive value for subsequent price changes. Although many of the coefficient
estimates are close to zero, the table shows that reversals are more prevalent for light
volume, high price change days than for either heavy volume, high price change
or light volume, low price change days. There is also some weaker evidence of
price continuations for openings with heavy volume. Together, the findings in
Figs. 4 and 5 and Table 2 suggest price reversals and continuations similar to those
documented by Stoll and Whaley (1990) for the New York Stock Exchange.
Finally, the distribution of price discovery across market makers is relatively
concentrated for each stock. Using price contribution as a measure of price discovery, Panel A of Table 3 shows that the three dealers with the largest share of price
contribution account for an average of one third of the total price contribution for
each stock. One half of the total price contribution is provided by an average of

194

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

FIG. 5. Unbiasedness and volume. The unbiasedness of the prices observed during the preopening
is tested by constructing a sample of preopening and closing trade and quote data for 52 active Nasdaq
stocks from October, 1995 to September, 1996. Then the following expression is estimated: V11 −
Pclose = α + β(Pt − Pclose ) + εt . Here V11 is the true value of the stock, assumed to be the 11 a.m.
price, Pt is the price at time t, and Pclose is the previous days closing price. The regression is estimated
using the quartile of the largest close to open returns for each stock in the sample period. The four lines
shown represent volume quartiles. Volume quartile one represents the smallest 25% of daily opening
trading volume during the period from 9:30 to 9:35 A.M. for each stock in our sample, quartile four
the largest 25%. The data have been truncated with the top 1% of the log close to open price change
days being dropped for each stock.

between six and seven market makers. Since the average stock has over 50 market
makers active during the preopening in our sample, the price contribution in each
stock is concentrated in a relatively small number of dealers.
A small number of dealers are also responsible for much of the price contribution
across stocks. Panel B of Table 3 lists the frequencies with which individual dealers
TABLE 2
Correlation between Close to Open and Open to 11:00 A.M. Returns
Volume Quartile
Return quartile

1 (lowest)

2

3

4 (highest)

Full sample
1 (smallest)
2
3
4 (largest)

−0.14*
−0.07*
−0.05*
−0.12*
−0.27*

−0.06*
−0.04
−0.01
0.06
−0.14*

−0.06*
0.01
0.09*
0.00
−0.14*

0.05*
0.02
0.04
0.13*
0.04

Note. Using sample data from 52 Nasdaq stocks from October 1, 1995 to September 30, 1996, this
table shows Pearson correlation coefficients for the signed close to open log return and signed open
to 11:00 A.M. log return. The coefficients are presented by volume and price change quartiles. Return
quartile one represents the smallest 25% of close to open returns for each stock in the sample period,
quartile four the largest 25%. Volume quartile one represents the smallest 25% of daily opening trading
volume during the period from 9:30 to 9:35 A.M. for each stock in our sample, quartile four the largest
25%. The data have been truncated with the top 1% of the log close to open price change days being
dropped for each stock, the reason being that there are a small number of very large price changes
(greater than 10%) that often represent takeovers or other unusual events. An asterisk indicates that the
correlation coefficient is different from zero at the 5% level.

195

NASDAQ PREOPENING
TABLE 3
Price Contribution by Dealer
Panel A
Percent of price
Number of market
contribution by top 3
makers for 50% price
market makers
contribution
Full sample
Quartile 1 (least active)
Quartile 2
Quartile 3
Quartile 4 (most active)

32.5
34.4
31.2
33.3
31.1

Number of market
makers quoting in
preopen

6.6
6.2
6.6
6.5
7.1

45.3
38.2
45.9
44.5
52.5

Panel B
Ranking
Name of market maker

#1

#2

#3

Total

Mayer & Schweitzer
Herzog
Merrill Lynch Inc.
Sherwood Securities Corp.
Bear, Stearns & Co. Inc.
Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc.

10
7
6
3
4
1

6
2
5
7
6
4

6
4
2
2
1
3

22
13
13
12
11
8

Totals

31

30

18

79

Note. Using 52 stocks over the period from October 1, 1995 to September 30, 1996, we evaluate
price contribution by dealers during the preopening. We define a price change as occurring following
a quote where a market maker’s quote resulted in the market being improved (a higher bid or a lower
ask). For each dealer in each stock, we calculate the weighted price contribution for that dealer as
WPCki =

T
X
t=1

Ã

¯ P Nt
¯ ! Ã P Nt
!
¯
¯
j=1 1P j,t
j=1 1P j,t I j,k
×
,
¯
¯
P T ¯ P Nt
P Nt
¯
t=1
j=1 1P j,t
j=1 1P j,t

where 1P j,t is the price change over the jth quote change on day t, Nt is the number of quote changes
on day t, and I j,k is a dummy variable with value 1 if the jth quote change was initiated by market
maker k and with value 0 otherwise. The first term in parentheses is the weighting factor for each day.
The second term in parentheses is the contribution of the price changes initiated by market maker k
on day t relative to total price changes on day t. Panel A shows price contribution by volume quartile.
Panel B ranks market makers by their relative price contribution, the number one market maker having
the greatest price contribution over the year for that stock. We then count the number of times a market
maker achieves a ranking of 1, 2, or 3. The market makers with the greatest number of top-three
rankings are listed in the table.

are identified as one of the three leading dealers in terms of price contribution for
a stock. The six dealers listed account for over 50% of the top three positions for
the 52 stocks in our sample. There are two types of dealers listed in Table 3, major
integrated broker dealers (such as Merrill Lynch) and major wholesalers (such as
Sherwood Securities).
The existence of integrated broker and wholesale dealers in the preopening warrants additional investigation into their motivations and patterns of price signaling.

196

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

FIG. 6. Percentage of price changes initiated by wholesaler dealer. Using sample data for 52 stocks
over the period from October 1, 1995 to September 30, 1996, this figure breaks the preopening down
into six time periods. The results show the percentage of preopening price changes initiated by a
wholesaler dealer (as opposed to an integrated brokerage dealer) during each period. The results are
based on the 12 top market makers (four of which are wholesalers) in terms of the frequency with
which they change the market quote. Tests for differences in proportions between the period before
8:30 a.m. and all the other time periods (except 8:30–8:45 a.m.) are significant at greater than the 5%
level. N is the number of price changes per period. The wholesalers include Mayer and Schweitzer,
Herzog, Sherwood Securities, and Knight Securities.

Figure 6 shows the proportion of price changes initiated by wholesale versus integrated broker dealers over time. While both types of dealers are active throughout
the preopening and play a significant role in price discovery, wholesaler dealers
become more active relative to integrated broker dealers as the opening approaches.
Broker dealers, such as Merrill Lynch, typically handle a significant portion
of institutional order flow. As institutional orders are both relatively large, and
potentially informed, signaling imbalances in this type of order flow should be
important to dealers. These firms also possess substantial in house research capability. Figure 6 shows that broker dealers are more active early in the preopening,
when price changes are larger.
Wholesale firms’ order flow is disproportionately retail order flow, which is
typically considered uninformed. But due to the random fluctuations of liquidity
demand, retail orders may cause order flow imbalances for dealers. These imbalances may worsen as the opening nears. Consistent with the pattern in Fig. 6,
wholesale dealers become more active in signaling their accumulated order imbalances just prior to the opening.
3. THE CUSTOMER CASE AGAINST INDICATING AHEAD
Having presented the empirical evidence from the Nasdaq preopening, we now
construct the customer position that the practice of indicating ahead does not

NASDAQ PREOPENING

197

constitute best execution. We present two arguments. The first relies on the common law agency concept of loyalty in the context of conflicting duty. The second
characterizes the practice of indicating ahead as a collaborative effort to enrich
dealers at their customers’ expense.
3.1. Common Law Agency and the Duty to the Customer
3.1.1. Loyalty
Common law requires an agent to be loyal and act exclusively in his or her
principal’s interest.15 Courts have accepted the position of the SEC that the fiduciary
duty of a broker-dealer begins with the solicitation of business and covers all aspects
of the client–broker relationship under the “shingle theory.”16 The client–broker
agency relationship is thus clearly in existence when an order is placed and when
the broker has consented to execute.17 The relationship ends when the transaction
is complete.18 Under Nasdaq Rule 2320, the dealer’s obligation for best execution
is defined as obtaining the most favorable terms for the customer on that specific
transaction, and not in terms of the market or any future transactions.19
Kyle (1989) demonstrates that the value of a trader’s private information decreases as her information is revealed through multiple rounds of trading. Cao and
Lyons (1998) show that information can consist of both payoff-relevant information about the asset’s final value and payoff-irrelevant information including the
effects of the customer’s order on dealer inventories.20 In the preopening, multiple
rounds of quotations replace the multiple rounds of trading in Kyle with prices
adjusting to new equilibrium levels as shown in Fig. 4 and Table 2. Disclosure
of interest harms customers with superior payoff-relevant information that could
have been rewarded with better trades at the opening had there been no dealer
preopening coordination of price. Even if the customer is uninformed about future
payoffs, revealing his or her interest allows all dealers to reflect the anticipated
inventory effect in their quotes.21
15 See the Restatement of Agency, sections 387, 424, and In Re Merrill Lynch, 911 F. Supp 754
(1995). Easterbrook and Fischel (1993) argue that the duty of loyalty “in its strong form” requires an
agent to work for the exclusive benefit of the principal.
16 Charles Hughes v. SEC, 139 F.2d 434 (2d Circuit.1943), Cert. denied, 321 U.S. 786 (1944).
17 Robinson v. Merrill Lynch, 337 F. Supp. 107, 111 (N.D. Ala. 1971), aff’d, 453 F.2d 417 (5th cir.
1972).
18 Ibid.
19 NASD Manual, Rules of the Association, Conduct Rules, ¶2320 (1996).
20 During the time of this study, over two-thirds of interdealer trading volume was conducted using
the telephone or SelectNet system where the dealer could refuse the trade. Both reputational issues
and the right of refusal reduce the ability of an informed dealer to compel trade at the posted quote of
an uninformed dealer. Compelled trade is central to Cao and Lyons’ (1998) argument that informed
traders will exploit their information rather than disclose it.
21 Admati and Pfleiderer (1991) show that disclosure of trading interest reduces trading costs for
uninformed traders but do not analyze the case for informed traders or account for inventory effects.

198

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

When a dealer discloses customer interests/orders in the Nasdaq preopening
without having any chance of executing them, he or she is not being loyal to the
customer. Even if the investor releases his or her property rights by communicating
an order to the dealer for purchase or sale at the opening price, such communication
is done with the expectation that the dealer will not betray confidentiality nor
give away the customer’s advantage. Customers without information may also be
harmed if the effect of an individual preopening quote causes prices to move away
from them. Indicating ahead thus harms all customers on the side of an order
imbalance.
3.1.2. Conflicting Duty
Dealer duties to the market do not subvert their duties to customers. On the
contrary, the dealer’s duty to the market is also undermined by the practice of
indicating ahead. Dealer duties to the market are rooted in the antimanipulation
requirements of Sections 10(b)(5) and 15c of the Exchange Act.22 This philosophy
of the integrity of the market extends well beyond the marketplace or exchange as
evidenced by NASD rule 3310, which states:
No member shall publish or circulate...any notice, circular, advertisement, newspaper article,
investment service, or communication of any kind...which purports to quote the bid price or
asked price for any security unless such member believes that such quotation represents a
bona fide bid for, or offer of, such security.23

The practice of indicating ahead in the preopening, where there is no chance of
filling the order, violates this rule as the quotation is not a bona fide bid or offer.
As such, the practice is an intentional interference with the free forces of supply
and demand.
The duty to the market does not require full disclosure of all the information in a
dealer’s possession, particularly the information relating to a customer order. The
limit order display rule implemented in 1997 requires the display, either through
the dealer’s quote or a pass-through arrangement, of all limit orders meeting certain
price and size requirements.24 The NASD and SEC have recognized that the required disclosure of all orders may be detrimental to customers and do not require
display of large orders, and market, contingent, or working orders.
Even if indicating ahead benefits the whole market, such a claim is irrelevant.25
Each dealer owes the duties of loyalty and confidentiality to each individual principal and each individual order. By revealing customer interests and orders early,
the dealer group has subverted the interests of clients to those of fellow dealers.
This practice denies the customer the opportunity to trade at the opening price that
would have prevailed had the order not been revealed.
17 C.F.R. § 240,10b-5 (1951), 17 C.F.R. § 240.15c (1995).
NASD Manual,Rules of the Association,Conduct Rules, ¶3310 (1996).
24 17 C.F.R. § 240.11Ac1–1 to § 240.11Ac1–4 (1996).
25 See Macey and O’Hara (1997, p. 211).
22
23

NASDAQ PREOPENING

199

3.2. Collaboration to Benefit Dealers to the Detriment of Their Customers
3.2.1. Dealer Benefits from Indicating Ahead
Dealers are active in the preopening, as Table 1 and Fig. 2 show. Dealers make
these indicative quotes in the preopening because it is in their interest. Farrell
(1995) discusses the notion of “cheap talk,” suggesting that antitrust law stops
even nonbinding communications about pricing. This is because the talk helps
competitors reach a collusive, and profitable, equilibrium.
Although they are allegedly competitors, dealers collaborate by using their indicative quotes to signal other dealers about price movements. This is evidenced
by the specific example given in Fig. 1 and the general pattern of price discovery
shown in Figs. 4 and 5. Moreover, Table 3 suggests leadership by certain dealers
in the price movements of individual stocks.
Indicating ahead is a collaborative sharing of information such as is criticized
in the recent SEC Section 21(a) report.26 The following quotation from that report
discusses an example of information sharing:
Some Nasdaq market makers have also worked improperly together in this way to fill customer
orders or to reduce inventory exposure. In such cases, a market maker having a sizeable
customer order or an inventory imbalance called upon other market makers to coordinate
their quotations and transactions with the requesting market maker. The fact that a market
maker used these arrangements when engaged in buying or selling securities for a customer
was typically not disclosed and may have violated the duties owed by the market maker to
its customer.27

The practice of indicating ahead benefits dealers by allowing them to move prices
prior to executing orders. While there are no specific rules against quoting ahead
of customer orders, trading ahead of customer block orders, or “front running,” is
currently prohibited under NASD Rule 2110-3 because the practice increases the
cost to the customer while profiting the dealer.28 As the dealer is the counterparty for
a majority of trades on Nasdaq, the practice of indicating ahead amounts to trading
ahead.29 Cases such as Barnett and Opper hold that there is not best execution
when dealers trade for their own account after accepting customer orders.30
Table 2 documents that large price reversals tend to occur in low-volume
openings.31 Since Nasdaq dealers are often the counterparties for their own customers, there is a conflict of interest between the price signal sent by a dealer
26 S.E.C. Report Pursuant to Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Regarding NASD
and the Nasdaq Market (1996), pp. 2–3, 26–27.
27 Ibid., p. 23–24.
28 NASD Manual, Rules of the Association, Conduct Rules, ¶2110-3 (1996).
29 Smith (1999) shows that dealer–customer trades are 72% of Nasdaq trading.
30 See Barnett v. United States, 319 F.2d 340 (8th Cir. 1963), where the brokerage traded for its
account after accepting a customer’s order, and Opper v. Hancock Securities Corp., 250 F. Supp. 668
(S.D.N.Y.), affd, 367 F.2d 157 (2d Cir. 1966), where the broker made representations that it was trying
to execute the customer’s order while it traded for its account.
31 See Stoll and Whaley (1990).

200

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

as an agent for the customer during the preopening and the price received by a
dealer trading as principal against the customer after trading starts. If monitoring
is imperfect, dealers can benefit by signaling excess price changes and then trading
against their customers.
Even under the extreme case of a zero-profit sequential trading model, such
as that proposed by Glosten and Milgrom (1985), dealers benefit by preopening
communications. In sequential trading models, all traders transact with the dealer
and the dealer’s expected profit is zero. If the preopening successfully determined
the new equilibrium price, the dealer’s profit would remain zero. But the preopening
allows dealers to reduce the risk to their expected profits, thereby benefiting them.
3.2.2. Harm to Customers
3.2.2.1. Subversion of information. When a customer’s order reflects new information, and that information is subverted from the customer to the market
through preopening indications, the customer is harmed. Figure 1 provides an
illustration. Assuming that a customer was informed about changes in the equilibrium price of the stock in this scenario, the revelation of her order flow during the
preopening leads to the higher price she must pay.32
The large price changes initiated by major investment banking and integrated
brokerage firms, such as Morgan Stanley’s actions in the Microsoft example,
could reflect informed institutional order flow. Dealers that handle a significant
proportion of institutional order flow also tend to possess a substantial market
research capability themselves. Their preopening indications could reflect their
own information-gathering abilities and knowledge of the market. The empirical
evidence does not identify whether indications by integrated broker dealers reflect
their customer order flow or their own research. But even if the indications are
based solely on the dealer’s own research, it is arguable that this advantage should
be for the benefit of the dealer’s own customers.
Wholesalers generally do not have a market research capability. However, Fig. 6
indicates that these wholesalers’ quotes still cause over 27% of price changes before
8:30 a.m. Further refinement of the data in Fig. 3 indicates that wholesalers are
as likely as integrated brokers to post quotes which change the market quote by
more than $1/8 prior to 8:30 a.m., 68.9% v. 66.4%. Wholesalers also represent a
substantial share of price contribution and leadership as shown in Table 3. Since
the primary private information available to wholesalers is their own order flow, it
appears that this order flow is informative. Indicating ahead subverts the value of
this informed order flow from customers to the market.
3.2.2.2. Order imbalances. Damage is also done to customers when preopening indications identify order imbalances and the market price deviates from the
equilibrium price. Figure 4 shows that at 9:29, the preopening price is a biased
estimator of the equilibrium price. Figures 4 and 5 and Table 2 show that the bias
32 Unfortunately, we do not have order flow data to more directly assess the value of this lost
information.

NASDAQ PREOPENING

201

triggers price reversals similar to those reported in Stoll and Whaley (1990). The
result is an opening Nasdaq price that overshoots the equilibrium price.33 Customers on the same side as the order imbalance thus tend to pay more (or receive
less) relative to the equilibrium price.
Price reversals on the opening are generally considered to be the dealers’ response to temporary imbalances in liquidity demand. Liquidity demand is more of
a concern for wholesalers than for integrated broker dealers. Figure 6 shows that
wholesalers become more active late in the preopening as they accumulate order
imbalances. They then move prices in order to balance their order flow. The pattern
in Fig. 3 suggests that these accumulated liquidity imbalances lead to small price
changes, as over 95% of the changes in the market quote are less than $1/8 in the
final minutes of the preopening.
An example of the motivation to balance supply and demand is taken from
O’Reilly (1999):
...a market maker with a large volume of retail buy orders—particularly before the market
opens—may note that the best offer in the market is for fewer shares than it needs to buy to
fill those orders. So to move the market and fill its orders, the market maker may enter a bid
at or higher than the current best offer to lock the market, hoping to get other market makers
to adjust their quotes.34

Even if inventory balancing is to be put ahead of individual customer interests,
one problem for customers is that dealers’ inventory balancing motive is confounded with other less desirable goals, such as price manipulation for profit.
The evidence of price reversals shown in Table 2 suggests that reversals seem
too large, particularly on days with light volume, to be driven solely by inventory
balancing.
O’Reilly (1999) discusses how dealers are affecting the market without trying
to reach the other side. Quoting from the article:
Wholesalers jack-up their prices at the opening, then short the stock before the prices retreat
to regular levels...35

There is some evidence that sophisticated customers realize the risks of trading
at the opening due to these manipulation risks. Chan et al. (1995) observe that
the size of trades is smaller at the opening than during the day. This is consistent
with institutions reducing their trading around the opening. In addition, Harris
and Schultz (1998) find that SOES traders avoid trading immediately after the
opening.
33

Recall the equilibrium price is taken to be the 11 a.m. or 3 p.m. price.
See O’Reilly (1999, p. 26).
35 Ibid. The quotation within the article is by Michael Barone, head of Nasdaq trading at William
Blair and Company. Along similar lines, Pulliam (1999) quotes Matt Johnson, head of Nasdaq trading
at Lehman Brothers, as saying “Some market makers are quoting at a higher level so they can buy it
back at a cheaper price.” More egregious examples of this practice evolve from goals aimed more at
manipulation than inventory balancing. For example, Pulliam (1999) describes the process of “painting
the screen” during the preopening.
34

202

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

4. THE DEALERS’ CASE IN REBUTTAL
This section presents the dealers’ case that preopening indications constitute
best execution. We begin with a discussion of the dealers’ duty to fully reflect
supply and demand during the preopening. Next comes a summary of the evidence
that indicating ahead benefits the market as a whole. The section concludes with
the argument that customers should understand the preopening and could avoid
exposing their orders if they objected to the practice.
4.1. Duty to the Market
Dealers have several obligations that are salient to an understanding of duty to the
market during the preopening. Dealers must have a quote entered into the Nasdaq
system by 9:30. The quote must be two-sided and reflect the dealers’ actual buying
and selling prices. Quotes must comply with the prohibitions against manipulative
practices outlined in NASD rules 2110 and 2120, which echo sections 10(b)(5)
and 15(c) of the Exchange Act.36
Under these obligations, displaying a price that does not reflect the dealer’s
assessment of the price necessary to clear the market could be deemed a manipulative practice. These obligations require that dealers use the preopening to identify
the opening, i.e., equilibrium, price. This contention is supported by the NASDR
Market Regulation Committee in NASDR v. Morgan Stanley...
...we recognize that it is appropriate and commonplace to use Nasdaq as vehicle to advertise
interest in either buying or selling securities... .37

This statement implies that a dealer’s duty to both his customer and the market
are best met by engaging in a search for the other side during the preopening.
Consistent with Biais et al. (1999), dealers’ quotes produce the public good of
price discovery. Current policy also recognizes that using Nasdaq quotes as a
means to conduct that search is appropriate and dealers need not use Instinet, the
telephone, or other means to advertise their interest.
4.2. Improved Market Function
Preopening indications improve the functioning of the whole market. The results
in Fig. 4 show that the opening price produced by preopening indications is close to
being an unbiased estimator of the price at 11 A.M. on the trading day. Figure 4 also
demonstrates how the prices as measured by trades occurring on alternative trade
systems like Instinet are more biased than prices measured by preopening quotes.
The price reversals seen in Figs. 4 and 5, and those implied by the correlation
coefficients in Table 2 are the result of searching for the other side. They are more
36 NASD Manual, Rules of the Association, Conduct Rules, ¶2110 and ¶2120 (1996); see also
17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5 (1951), 17 C.F.R. § 240.15c (1995).
37 See NASDR v. Morgan Stanley, supra at note 8, p. 61.

NASDAQ PREOPENING

203

pronounced on low-volume days because this search is more difficult for the dealer
and costly to the customer. As such, evidence of reversals alone is insufficient to
show damage to customers.
Indicating ahead benefits customers by enabling them to obtain a more favorable
price. It reduces informational asymmetries and lowers the search costs that would
be incurred if trading interest were not disclosed. On a theoretical basis, Admati and
Pfliederer (1991) show that disclosure of trading interest lowers the asymmetric
information cost to traders. The intuition behind this result is supported by both
experimental (e.g., Flood et al. (1999)) and empirical work (e.g., Naik and Yadav
(1999)). Furthermore, Flood et al. (1999) show that the costs associated with search
can be eliminated with transparent quotes.
Experimental evidence such as Crawford (1998) and Flood et al. (1999) also
suggests that price discovery would be slower in the absence of preopening communications. The practice of indicating ahead thus promotes price discovery and
speeds execution of customer orders. Macey and O’Hara (1997) argue that these
are elements of best execution. Under the view that best execution is more of a
general condition than a specific requirement for each trade, minimizing the total
costs of trading should be the goal. These costs include the “opportunity costs of
failing to trade in a timely manner.38
Preopening indications also improve liquidity and reduce market fragmentation.
When a dealer takes advantage of her competitors by using her superior information at the opening, a disadvantaged dealer may choose not trade with her anymore. This would raise the adverse selection costs for dealers, akin to the “cream
skimming” example discussed by Easley et al. (1996). Higher adverse selection
costs for dealers will lead to higher trading costs for customers. If informed trades
subsequently move off Nasdaq, then the market will become thinner and less transparent. Arguably, one comparison is the recent experience of the London SETS
market.39
Telser (1985) argues that competition may require some cooperation in order
to maintain efficiency. The preopening indications of dealers are a cooperative
process that aims at improving the functioning of the market. The practice of
indicating ahead thus supports an Edgeworth contract surface. In short, it is not
possible to make any one trader better off by changing the price he or she receives
without making at least one other trader worse off. For example, in the case of the
preopening, those customers on the side of the imbalance may receive “worse”
prices than they would if indicating ahead did not occur. But those customers on
the contra side receive “better” prices because of the practice of indicating ahead.
To demand that best execution apply to every quote and trade will raise the costs
for all customers. As Macey and O’Hara (1997) argue, pursuing a narrow concept
of best execution may make markets less efficient.
38

See Macey and O’Hara (1997, p. 220).
See Ascarelli, S. (1998). London Stock Exchange plans to cut hours: Move is effort to improve
liquidity in its SETS electronic order book, The Wall Street Journal, May 29, Sect. B, p. 7A.
39

204

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

4.2.1. Burden of Proof and Counterfactuals
Even if arguments that preopening communications improve market function
are rejected, customer claims of damage must still fail. There is no empirical basis
to directly evaluate harm in the absence of a comparison to a situation where
preopening communications do not exist.
Plaintiffs carry the burden of proving damage. In this case, plaintiffs are customers. While the evidence (such as Table 3) indicates that certain types of dealers
are active in the preopening, none of the empirical results directly indicate damage.
For example, evidence of price reversals alone (Table 2) does not prove damage.
Price reversals could have been more severe in the absence of preopening communications. Without the counterfactual evidence, the customer cannot meet the
burden of proof.
4.3. Customer Sophistication
The dissent in Manning argues that customer sophistication is an issue in best
execution debates.40 Table 3 shows that the major investment banking and brokerage firms (Morgan Stanley, etc.) are often leaders in moving the preopening
price. It is their customers who are most likely harmed. But their customers should
tend to be larger and more sophisticated than the customer group as a whole.41 As
such, they should know about this preopening mechanism. They are free to submit
orders during trading hours or trade with other dealers whom they believe will
better protect their interests.42
Large investors probably will not object to this practice because it helps achieve
the best execution of blocks. Otherwise, execution would be much slower and
potentially at worse prices. Unsophisticated (uninformed) customers actually benefit from preopening communications. If this is a zero-sum game, the prestige
group often leads (gives away their larger clients’ information advantage) to the
betterment of small investors.
Inventory balancing facilitated by the preopening helps small traders who buy
and sell infrequently. The overshooting identified in Table 2 merely reflects the
appropriate price change needed to achieve desired inventory exposure in a dealer
market confronted with the overnight accumulation of orders. Moreover, Nasdaq
dealers do not normally charge their customers a commission for trades executed
when the market takes the other side. The customer receives an execution, at a price
he was willing to pay, pays the spread, and does not pay an additional commission.
5. POLICY CHOICES
The strength of the arguments both for and against the practice of indicating
ahead highlights the difficulty of crafting regulatory alternatives for the preopening.
40

See Manning, supra at note 2, pp. 89, 333–338.
We assume this given the natural selection process.
42 The nature of the fiduciary duty owed will vary depending upon the relationship between the
broker and the investor. See Romano v. Merrill Lynch, 834 F.2d 523, 530 (5th Cir. 1987).
41

NASDAQ PREOPENING

205

The Nasdaq dealers have a difficult job. They must open the market even when
there may be an imbalance of orders due to information arrival. In so doing, they
must choose between the interests of an individual order and overall interests of
their customers and the market. Unlike the NYSE, there is no single dealer (the
specialist) who matches orders.43 On the Paris Bourse, which is also a dealer market
like Nasdaq, the exchange has a central computer that clears the market to open.44
How should Nasdaq open consistent with best execution? As the previous two
sections indicate, there is a tension between the needs of the market at the opening
and the duty to individual transactions as described in ¶2320. We evaluate several
policy alternatives. First, we discuss the all (bar all preopening indications) or
nothing (status quo) approaches. We then examine two midrange policy choices.
One is the mandatory disclosure of the practice of indicating ahead. The second is
the adoption of an automated or batch style opening for Nasdaq.
In evaluating the alternatives, we begin with the parameters for market quality
provided by Domowitz and Steil (1999). They argue that liquidity, as measured
by spreads and market depth, is a facet of a well-functioning market. In addition,
informational efficiency, composed of considerations of adverse selection and
speed of execution, forms a component in the assessment of market quality. We also
evaluate the alternatives in terms of dealer duties to an individual customer which
are based on common law agency principles of confidentiality and loyalty. These
parameters require the agent to seek the most favorable terms for a customer’s
transaction.
5.1. Maintain Status Quo
Currently, Nasdaq trading at the opening is characterized by spreads that do not
appreciably widen, the ability to trade a large number of shares, and informationally
efficient prices. This comes at the cost of revealing customer trading interest to
the market, which could lead to a reduction in overnight information production.
In addition, the current opening allows dealers to act in their self-interest to the
detriment of customers’ individual orders. From a legal perspective, the current
opening favors the concept of best execution as a general condition rather than
applying it on a trade-by-trade basis.
The NASD posture toward the preopening suggests that this regulatory body
believes that the benefits of the practice of indicating ahead outweigh the costs.45
From a regulatory perspective, those customers whose trades may be individually
informative to the market are the customers most qualified to protect their own interests. In this instance, the practice of indicating ahead constitutes best execution.
The remaining issue for regulators is to distinguish between proper information
sharing through quotes and improper information sharing as described in the 21(a)
report.46
43

See Madhavan and Panchapagesan (1997).
See Biais et al. (1999).
45 There is NASD interest in reducing the frequency of locked and crossed markets at the start of
trading.
46 See SEC 21(a) Report, supra at note 26, pp. 26–27.
44

206

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

The problem with the do-nothing approach is that the line between acceptable
and improper communications is hard to draw (and harder to enforce). In addition,
indicating ahead smacks of the “friendly competition” and “hand holding” criticized in the SEC Section 21(a) report.47 The practice arguably violates a dealer’s
duty of loyalty, and undermines the confidence in the Nasdaq market.
5.2. Ban the Practice
Such an alternative would be implemented by not allowing the Nasdaq computers to be turned on until just prior to the opening and prohibiting interdealer
communication prior to trading. An individual customer order would not be disclosed unless on an alternative market where live trading was occurring. Best
execution would be satisfied in the sense of no single order being disadvantaged
relative to others. But such a ban would widen spreads and reduce liquidity and
price efficiency.
A ban on preopening coordination on the Nasdaq system really aims at stopping cheap talk among dealers. While not turning on the Nasdaq computers
would be easily implemented, this broader goal would be difficult to enforce.
In the spirit of the regulatory dialectic, keeping the Nasdaq computers off during the preopening would invite attempts by dealers to communicate in other
forums. Having dealers coordinating market-opening positions off-Nasdaq would
be more difficult to monitor and enforce than having the preopening cheap talk on
Nasdaq.
Off-Nasdaq coordination would raise dealer search costs relative to the current
baseline. It is likely that these costs would be passed on to customers. If spreads
were to widen, liquidity to decrease, and prices to become less informative there
would be substantial costs passed on to traders. Easterbrook and Fischel (1993)
argue that courts (and regulators, by inference) should refrain from adopting rules
that raise costs without benefit. Under this rationale, both sides may be better off
if the current preopening communication practice is allowed to continue.
As the issue here is one of conflicting duty, an alternative to proscribing all
preopening communication would be to prevent preopening communication from
being based on customer order flow. This policy assumes that a “Chinese Wall”
between the trading desk and incoming customer orders can be maintained. Preopening quotes can then adjust to reflect public information, but not the information
in order flow. But the disadvantages of this policy are similar to those of prohibiting all preopening quotes; orders might be displayed on alternative systems or via
private communication.
5.3. Require Disclosure
Assessing rights and obligations within the context of fiduciary relationships
is often difficult. Easterbrook and Fischel (1993) argue that fiduciary duties are
47

See SEC 21(a) Report, supra at note 26, p. 6.

NASDAQ PREOPENING

207

generally characterized by unusually high costs of specification and monitoring.
Instead of trying to capture all aspects of the relationship in written contract, an
agent assumes a duty of “loyalty in objective, and a duty of care in performance.”48
Easterbrook and Fischel (1993) suggest that “the details should be those that
maximize the gain, which the contracting parties can divide.”49
Because of these difficulties in assessing rights and duties in fiduciary relationships, dealer fiduciary duty cases such as Chassins emphasize that an agent
should disclose conflicts of interest to customers.50 Disclosure of the practice of
indicating ahead may add transparency that could be useful in establishing a fair
bargain between customers and dealers. Customers might well not agree to dealer
preopening communications if they dickered about the subject explicitly.51 With
proper disclosure, customers could at least time their submission of orders to
address a dealer’s conflict of interest. The Section 21(a) report states “An undisclosed arrangement between or among dealers that results in a broker dealer acting
contrary to the interests of its customer is incompatible with the firms’ agency duties to its customers.52
The effects of requiring customer disclosure are complex to analyze. Traders
who believe their trades to be informative may alter their submission strategy. If
informed traders avoided submitting orders prior to trading, some of the problems
associated with banning the practice might ensue.
Brokerage agreements typically disclose that purchases and sales may be made
in different markets. They are generally silent about whether customer indications
of interest and/or orders may be exposed. Requiring this disclosure would arguably
facilitate bargaining and customer choice on this issue. But this may be of little
benefit since the customers impacted most by this practice are also the ones most
likely to be aware of it already. As such, sophisticated large traders may gain little
from formal notification of this practice. Small traders may not care since the
practice is an added complication that arguably benefits them anyway. Further, as
Easterbrook and Fischel (1993) point out, the process of “soliciting waivers” takes
time and is costly.
5.4. Adopt an Automated or Batch Style Opening
A final alternative is to batch the customers’ orders and dealers’ trading interest
into a single, presumably automated, system. While batch auctions have some
advantages for opening a market, they do not unambiguously dominate dealer
markets.53 Such a system avoids the conflicting duty problem of the preopening.
However, batch style opening is inconsistent with the dealer structure of the Nasdaq
48

See Easterbrook and Fischel (1993, p. 426).
Ibid.
50 See Chassins v. Smith, Barney & Co., 438 F.2d 1167, 1172 (2d Cir. 1970).
51 See Easterbrook and Fischel (1993) and Jordan v. Duff & Phelps Inc. 815 F.2d 429, 436 (1987).
52 See SEC 21(a) Report, supra at note 26, p. 24.
53 See Madhavan (1992) for a thorough analysis.
49

208

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY
TABLE 4
Summary of Policy Alternatives for Preopening
Priority of duties to market

Priority of duties to customer

Policy alternatives

Liquidity

Efficiency

Confidentiality

Loyalty

Status quo
Ban
Disclosure
Automation

High
Low
Uncertain
Uncertain

High
Low
Uncertain
Uncertain

Low
High
Intermediate
Intermediate

Low
High
High
Intermediate

Note. This table presents a summary of four policy alternatives for the NASDAQ preopening. Each
alternative is ranked regarding the relative (high, low, or intermediate) priority it places on supporting
dealers’ market duties and customer duties. In some cases, the impact (and priority) is uncertain. Those
cases are labeled as such. Dealer market duties are to provide liquidity, which consists of considerations
of spread and depth, and efficiency, which consists of speed and adverse selection considerations.
Dealer duties to customers consist of confidentiality of orders and loyalty to an individual order.
The alternatives are to leave the preopening as it is (status quo), allow no preopening indications on
NASDAQ (ban), require disclosure of the practice of indicating ahead to customers (disclosure), and
automate the preopening by submission of all orders to an electronic source (automation).

market. Furthermore, existing automated batch systems have not been free from
problems including illiquidity and gaming.54
5.5. Comparing Policy Alternatives
Comparing the policy alternatives to each other is problematic in the absence
of criteria for measurement. As best execution eludes precise legal definition the
criteria that encompass this concept also remain arbitrary. Best execution involves
both dealer duties to the market and dealer duties to individual customers. Table 4
provides an assessment of the relative priority each set of duties receives under the
various policy alternatives for the Nasdaq preopening. The overall tradeoff that
is apparent in the conflict of dealer duties is apparent. The policy alternative that
arguably prioritizes market duties is the status quo, but it offers the lowest priority to customer duties. On the other hand, banning preopening communications
emphasizes the individual customer duties, but arguably harms both liquidity and
informational efficiency.
The remaining alternatives provide some interesting middle ground. Formal
notification as a policy appears to support a balancing of the conflicting duties
to market and customer. Dealers communicate their intentions to indicate ahead,
while presumably persuading the customer that the practice is in that customer’s
best interests. But the effect of a formal policy of disclosure on the market is
difficult to analyze.
Automated systems can remove the dealer’s balancing of market and customer
considerations, but their use undermines the dealer structure of Nasdaq. Domowitz
54

For a survey, see Domowitz (1993).

NASDAQ PREOPENING

209

and Steil (1999) argue that cross subsidization is a feature of dealer markets. This
cross subsidization arguably occurs in the current preopening as it exists. Informed
orders subsidize uninformed orders. The changeover to an electronic system removes this subsidization to the advantage of informed orders. But uninformed
orders are left worse off. Whether the costs of this arrangement are higher than
under the existing opening is an unanswered question. As Domowitz and Steil
(1999) observe, comparisons of traditional and automated markets are difficult
given self-selection bias. The comparisons that do exist do not suggest a strong
advantage for either type of system.

6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This paper asks whether Nasdaq dealers’ practice of indicating ahead of customers in the Nasdaq preopening constitutes best execution. Dealers use nonexecutable quotes to both facilitate price discovery and improve stock inventory
management. From the dealers’ perspective, this practice improves functioning
of the overall market, thereby benefiting customers as a group. But from the customer’s point of view, these communications are collusive and violate the duty of
loyalty owed to each principal individually. In addition, the practice may transfer
wealth from the customer group to the dealer group as a whole and is difficult to
monitor.
Adjudication of this issue turns on how best execution is defined. On one hand,
best execution should be more of an overall condition than a requirement at any
point in time. This definition strengthens the dealers’ position by putting the duty
to the market above the duty to individual customers. Although an “unappealing
specter”55 for some, defining best execution as an overall condition is a recognition
of the futility in trying to characterize the concept on a trade-by-trade basis.
But conversely, defining best execution based on “hornbook” agency law means
that each dealer owes a duty of loyalty to her customer individually. Under this
view, dealer duties to the market are irrelevant. This definition favors the customer
position, as “indicating ahead” puts the dealer’s financial interests ahead of those of
individual customers. The result is direct harm for some customers and a violation
of the duty.
The preopening is an interesting example of the blurring line between markets
and institutions. Dealers, although competitors in market making, coordinate their
actions, effectively acting as a single organization to open the market. From a
policy standpoint, the practice of indicating ahead in the Nasdaq preopening raises
a concern that “the goal of best execution for the individual may not be compatible
with the broader goal of best execution for the market as a whole.”56
55
56

See Macey and O’Hara (1997, p. 211).
Ibid., p. 206.

210

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

The specific policy question we ask is what action regulators should take regarding preopening indications. We examine four alternatives: (1) do nothing, (2)
ban outright preopening indications on the Nasdaq system, (3) require disclosure
of the practice to investors, or (4) initiate an automated or batch-style opening
procedure.
Doing nothing appears suboptimal, since this practice smacks of inappropriate
sharing of information and has a direct impact on unknowing traders. An outright
ban may be easy to implement (simply do not allow the Nasdaq computers to be
turned on until just before the opening), but it may not be the best approach either.
Banning preopening indications on Nasdaq sets the stage for the dealers to find
another forum in which to communicate and may reduce market quality. Disclosure
may have little effect since most informed traders know of the practice already.
Automated or batch-style openings are inconsistent with the dealer structure of the
Nasdaq market. They also have the potential for abuse.
REFERENCES
1. Articles
Admati, A. R., and Pfleiderer, P. (1991). Sunshine trading and financial markets equilibirum, Rev.
Finan. Stud. 4, 443–482.
Ascarelli, S. (1998). London Stock Exchange plans to cut hours: Move is effort to improve liquidity in
its SETS electronic order book, Wall Street Journal (May 29), 7A.
Biais, B., Hillion, P., and Spatt, C. (1999). Price discovery and learning during the preopening on the
Paris Bourse, J. Polit. Econ., in press.
Cao, H. H., and Lyons, R. K. (1998). “Inventory Information,” working paper, University of California,
Berkeley.
Cao, C., Ghysels, E., and Hatheway, F. (1999). Why Is the Bid Price Greater than the Ask? Price
Discovery during the Nasdaq Preopening, J. Finance, in press.
Chan, K. C., Christie, W., and Schultz, P. H. (1995). Market structure and the intraday pattern of bid-ask
spreads in Nasdaq securities, J. Business 68, 35–60.
Chernov, M., and Hatheway, F. (1999). “The Nasdaq Preopening,” Working Paper, Department of
Finance, Pennsylvania State University.
Christie, W., and Schultz, P. (1994). Why do Nasdaq market-makers avoid odd-eighth quotes?
J. Finance 49, 1813–1840.
Crawford, V. (1998). A survey of experiments on communication via cheap talk, J. Econ. Theory 78,
289–298.
Domowitz, I. (1993). Automating the price discovery process: Some international comparisons and
regulatory implications, J. Finan. Serv. Res. 6, pp. 305–326.
Domowitz, I., and Steil, B. (1999). Automation, trading costs, and the structure of the trading services
industry, Brookings–Wharton Pap. Finan. Serv., in press.
Easley, D., Kiefer, N., and O’Hara, M. (1996) Cream-skimming or profit-sharing? The curious role of
purchased order flow, J. Finance 51, 811–834.
Easterbrook, F., and Fischel, D. (1993). Contract and fiduciary duty, J. Law Econ. 36, 425–446.
Farrell, J. (1995). Talk is cheap, Amer. Econ. Rev. 85, 186–190.

NASDAQ PREOPENING

211

Flood, M. D., Huisman, R., Koedijk, K. G., and Lyons, R. K. (1999). “Search Costs, the Neglected
Spread Component,” Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley.
Flood, M. D., Huisman, R., Koedijk, K. G., and Mahieu, R. J. (1999). Quote disclosure and price
discovery in multiple-dealer financial markets, Rev. Finan. Stud. 12, 37–60.
Glosten, L. R., and Milgrom, P. R. (1985). Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market with
heterogeneously informed traders, J. Finan. Econ. 14, 71–100.
Harris, J. H., and Schultz, P. H. (1998). The trading profits of SOES bandits, J. Finan. Econ. 50,
39–62.
Kyle, A. S. (1989). Informed speculation with imperfect competition, Rev. Econ. Stud. 56, 317–
355.
Macey, J., and O’Hara, M. (1997). The law and economics of best execution, J. Fin. Intermed. 6,
188–223.
Madhavan, A. (1992). Trading mechanisms in securities markets, J. Finance 47, 607–642.
Madhavan, A., and Panchapagesan, V. (1997). “Price Discovery and Exchange Openings,” Working
Paper, University of Southern California.
Madhavan, A., and Dutta, P. (1997). Competition and collusion in dealer markets, J. Finance 52,
245–276.
Naik, N., and Yadav, P. (1999). “The Effects of Market Reform on Trading Costs of Public Investors:
Evidence from the London Stock Exchange,” Working Paper, London Business School.
Notes (anonymous) (1994). The perils of payment for order flow, 107, Harvard Law Rev. 1675–
1692.
O’Reilly, M. (1999). Struggling with locked and crossed markets, Traders (May, 1999), 25–28.
Pulliam, S. (1999). Has a ’20s trick donned millennium clothes? Wall Street Journal (June 11, 1999),
C1–C2.
Smith, J. W. (1999). “The Role of Quotes in Attracting Orders on the Nasdaq Inter-dealer Market,”
Working Paper, NASD.
Stoll, H. (1978). The supply of dealer services in securities markets, J. Finance 33, 1133–1151.
Stoll, H., and Whaley, R. (1990). Stock market structure and volatility, Rev. Finan. Stud. 3, 37–71.
Telser, L. (1985). Cooperation, competition, and efficiency, J. Law Econ. 28, 271–295.

2. Cases
Barnett v. United States, 319 F.2d 340 (8th Cir. 1963).
Charles Hughes v. SEC, 139 F.2d 434 (2d Circuit. 1943), cert. denied, 321 U.S. 786 (1944).
Chassins v. Smith, Barney & Co., 438 F.2d 1167 (2d Cir. 1970).
In re E. F. Hutton & Co., Securities Exchange Act Release No. 25887 (1988 Transfer Binder) Fed. Sec.
L. Rep. (CCH) 84303 (July 6, 1988).
In re Merrill Lynch, No. CIV 94-5343 (DRD). (1995 WL 746866) (Fed. D.N.J.) 1995.).
Jordan v. Duff & Phelps Inc., 815 F.2d 429 (7th Cir. 1987), cert. dismissed, 108 S. Ct. 1067 (1988).
NASD Notices to Members–Disciplinary Actions, May 1998, NASD Regulation Sanctions Morgan
Stanley and Seven Traders.
NASDR v. Morgan Stanley, Decision Proceeding No. CMS 960235, April 13, 1998.
Opper v. Hancock Securities Corp., 250 F. Supp. 668 (S.D.N.Y.), aff’d, 367 F.2d 157 (2d Cir. 1966).
Robinson v. Merrill Lynch, 337 F. Supp. 107, 111 (N.D. Ala. 1971), aff’d, 453 F.2d 417 (5th Cir.
1972).
Romano v. Merrill Lynch, 834 F.2d 523, 530 (5th Cir. 1987).

212

CICCOTELLO AND HATHEWAY

3. Statutes, Regulations, and Related Materials
17 C.F.R. § 240.9a (1995).
17 C.F.R. § 240.15c (1995).
17 C.F.R. § 240.11Ac1-1 (1996).
NASD Manual, Rules of the Association, Conduct Rules, ¶2110-3, 2120, 2320, 3310 (1996).
Restatement (Second) of Agency (1957).
Securities and Exchange Commission, Report Pursuant to Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934 Regarding the NASD and the Nasdaq Market (1996).

