Journal of Financial Intermediation 9, 240–273 (2000)
doi:10.1006/jfin.2000.0287, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Market Discipline and Incentive Problems in Conglomerate
Firms with Applications to Banking1
Arnoud W. A. Boot2
Finance Group, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and CEPR

and
Anjolein Schmeits3
John M. Olin School of Business, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri
Received September 17, 1998

This paper analyzes the optimality of conglomeration. We show that the potential benefits
of conglomeration depend critically on the effectiveness of market discipline for stand-alone
activities. Effective market discipline reduces the benefits of conglomeration. With ineffective market discipline of stand-alone activities, conglomeration would further undermine
market discipline, but may nevertheless be beneficial. In particular, when rents are not too
high, the diversification benefits of conglomeration dominate the negative incentive effects.
A more competitive environment therefore induces conglomeration. We also show that introducing internal cost-of-capital allocation schemes creates internal market discipline that
complements the weak external market discipline of a conglomerate. Our analysis sheds
light on the Barings debacle and other recent developments in the banking sector. Journal
C 2000 Academic Press
of Economic Literature Classification Numbers: G20, G21, G34. °

1 We thank Sudipto Bhattacharya, Erik Berglöf, Patrick Bolton, Peter Ove Christensen, Phil
Dybvig, Mark Flannery, Dalia Marin, Stewart Myers, M. P. Narayanan, Raghu Rajan, Anjan Thakor,
and participants of the Risk Management in Banking Conference at the Wharton Financial Institutions
Center (October 1996), the Annual Meetings of the Western Finance Association in San Diego (June
1997), the European Finance Association in Vienna (August 1997), the CEPR Conference on Core
Competencies, Diversification and the Role of Internal Capital Markets in Naples (January 1999), and
seminar participants at the Bank of England, Tilburg University, the University of Amsterdam and the
University of Michigan for their helpful comments.
2 Corresponding address: Roetersstraat 11, 1018 WB Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Fax: +31 20
525 5285. E-mail: awaboot@fee.uva.nl.
3 Corresponding address: Campus Box 1133, One Brookings Drive, St. Louis, MO 63130-4899.
Fax: (314) 935 6359. E-mail: schmeits@olin.wustl.edu.

240
1042-9573/00 $35.00

c 2000 by Academic Press
Copyright °
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

241

1. INTRODUCTION
How much should firms diversify? Although few would deny that some diversification is necessary, the optimal scope of a firm’s activities is not well-defined.
This paper focuses on internal incentive problems that may arise from interactions between different divisions in a conglomerate firm. In particular, it analyzes
the impact of market discipline, internal discipline and product market rents in
determining whether conglomeration is optimal.
The intuition developed in the paper is as follows. We consider two divisions,
A and B, that need to be financed externally and either may operate as standalone firms or may be integrated in a two-divisional (conglomerate) firm. Division
A makes a partially observable risk choice that affects its cash flows, whereas
division B’s risk is initially exogenous. The degree of market discipline determines
the sensitivity of division A’s (stand-alone) funding costs to its risk-taking behavior.
That is, market discipline affects the speed of adjustment of the funding cost to
risk choices.
If the two divisions are integrated in one firm, the pooled funding cost of the
conglomerate reflects only partially the risk choice of each division; the divisions
co-insure each other. That is, the conglomerate firm’s returns are more predictable,
and ceteris paribus default is less likely. This has three effects on the risk choice of
division A. First, the co-insurance lowers the pooled funding rate and hence reduces
risk-taking incentives induced by limited liability. We label this the diversification
effect of co-insurance. This effect considered in isolation improves division A’s
risk choice. Second, the default probability of the firm becomes less sensitive to
risk-taking by division A. This reduces the expected costs of financial distress,
thus inducing extra risk-taking (negative incentive effect of co-insurance). Third,
since the pooled funding rate of the conglomerate firm is less sensitive to division
A’s risk choice than the funding rate of division A as a stand-alone entity (division
B “smoothes”), division A internalizes only a part of the higher funding cost of the
combined firm due to greater risk-taking. Thus, market discipline becomes less
effective, inducing free-riding inefficiencies in division A’s decisions (negative
incentive effect of reduced market discipline).
Our main insights are as follows. How effective the market disciplines standalone activities (divisions) matters considerably in determining the benefits of
conglomeration; effective market discipline reduces the benefits of conglomeration. The reason is that the risk-taking incentives of a stand-alone activity are
fully mitigated if the activity is exposed to optimal market discipline. Conglomeration then can only worsen decisions. With ineffective market discipline, conglomeration can help. In particular, when rents are not too high, the diversification benefits of conglomeration may dominate the negative incentive effects. That
is, with modest rents diversification is valuable, because it helps protect these
rents and reduces risk-taking incentives induced by limited liability. This creates a clear link between the optimality of conglomeration and the competitive

242

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

environment: a more competitive environment (lower rents) strengthens the case
for conglomeration.
We also analyze the effectiveness of internal cost-of-capital allocation schemes
and managerial incentive contracts. Could these alter the trade-off between conglomeration and stand-alone organizations? We show that internal cost-of-capital
allocation schemes complement the weak external market discipline of the conglomerate and favor conglomeration. In this context, we argue that these schemes
should respond to actual risk choices, rather than anticipated risk choices. We also
show that due to precommitment problems, the optimality of conglomeration in
our framework cannot be mimicked through the use of managerial incentive contracts. That is, no robust incentive contract can be written between the manager
and the shareholders of stand-alone divisions that perfectly replicates the divisions’
incentives in a conglomerate firm.
These observations highlight the costs and benefits of conglomeration and the
role that the competitive environment plays. We believe these issues are particularly
acute in the context of banking. Modern commercial banking has been transformed
from a purely relationship-type business into one where a transaction-orientation—
with proprietary trading as a prime example—has become more prevalent. The risk
profile of these activities is very different from that of traditional banking. This
could invite cross-subsidization and free-riding in conglomerate banks. In particular, the relatively low-risk relationship banking activities may subsidize the more
risky trading activities. This would reduce market discipline on the trading activities and could invite more risk-taking. Some noteworthy recent financial debacles
highlight the conflicts between proprietary trading and relationship banking activities. In particular, the demise of the British merchant bank Barings illustrates the
conflict between relationship banking (Barings’ traditional merchant bank activities in London) and trading activities (its infamous Singapore operations). While
Barings was an extreme case, the friction between relationship banking and trading
is typical for modern banking.
Our analysis relates to the broader issue of the determinants of the boundaries of
firms; see, for example, Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart (1995). These contributions to industrial economics generally focus on synergies, i.e., complementarity
or joint production. A related literature focuses, as we do, on the co-insurance benefits of conglomeration in the absence of synergies. These papers show that the
resulting lower variability of cash flows may increase the value of tax shields
(see Flannery et al., 1993), increase the effectiveness of debt as a bonding device
(see Li and Li, 1996) or improve investment incentives (see Kahn, 1992). While
co-insurance is an important consideration in our analysis as well, our primary
focus is on the free-riding incentives of divisions. A related paper in this respect
is Fulghieri and Hodrick (1997), which also studies interactions and agency problems between divisions in a conglomerate firm. However, in contrast to our work,
their focus is on synergistic mergers.
Our analysis of internal cost-of-capital allocation schemes is related to recent
studies that examine the allocation of internally and externally raised capital to

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

243

investment projects or divisions within a firm in the presence of information and
incentive problems. Stein (1997) analyzes the role of corporate headquarters in
allocating scarce resources to competing projects in an internal capital market.
Rajan and Zingales (1999) and Wulf (1998) address the adverse consequences
of power struggles and influence costs on the allocation of capital within firms.
A growing empirical literature furthermore documents that the diversification associated with conglomeration destroys value. Berger and Ofek (1995), Lamont
(1997), and Shin and Stulz (1998) suggest that this diversification discount arises
from investment inefficiencies caused by inefficient cross-subsidies between divisions in a conglomerate firm. In addition, a large literature has emerged on internal
capital allocation and performance measurement systems like RAROC and EVA in
financial institutions (see, for example, James and Houston, 1996, and Zaik et al.,
1996). Stoughton and Zechner (1999) analyze financial institutions’ decentralized
capital allocation decisions in the presence of information asymmetries and derive
an optimal capital allocation mechanism. These papers, however, do not consider
free-riding problems between divisions, but focus instead on the optimal allocation
of funds across divisions to improve investment efficiency. We emphasize that internal cost-of-capital allocation mechanisms are pivotal, once incentive problems
and free-riding are considered.
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces the formal
model and contains the analysis. Internal cost-of-capital allocation mechanisms
and incentive contracting issues are considered in Section 3. Section 4 focuses
on banking, in particular on the interactions between relationship banking and
proprietary trading activities. In Section 5 we discuss further implications of our
analysis and empirical evidence. Section 6 contains the conclusions. All the proofs
are in the Appendix.
2. THE MODEL: SETUP AND ANALYSIS
2.1. Specification
A. Production possibilities for divisions. Consider two divisions, division A
and division B. Each needs $1 of external financing in order to invest in a project.
All funding is raised through debt contracts.4 The riskless interest rate is assumed
to be zero and there is universal risk neutrality. At t = 0, the manager of division
A undertakes the project and decides on the monitoring intensity m that affects the
risk of the project. A higher monitoring level corresponds to lower risk. The private
monitoring cost equals V (m), with V 0 (m) > 0 and V 00 (m) > 0. A level of m ∈ [0, 1]
results in a success probability θ + (1 − θ )m, with θ ∈ [1/2, 1].5 The parameter θ
is publicly observable; m is only partially observable and nonverifiable. At t = 1
4

The use of debt in our paper can be rationalized on grounds of nonverifiability, and hence noncontractibility, of the divisions’ cash flows.
5 The condition θ ≥ 1/2 guarantees the equivalence between monitoring and risk choices; i.e., given
θ ≥ 1/2 increasing monitoring effort is equivalent to reducing risk.

244

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

project returns are realized. In case of success the project return is X > 1 and in
case of failure the return equals zero.
The capitalized future profits of division A, incorporating all expected cash
flows from the periods beyond t = 1, are represented by the parameter F. In case
of default, division A is terminated and F will be lost.6 Division B’s cash flow
distribution is initially exogenous. Its project generates an end-of-period (t = 1) return of Y > 1 with a probability p ∈ (0, 1) and 0 with probability (1 − p). Divisions
A and B have uncorrelated returns. In Section 4, we generalize this structure.
B. Organizational structure, divisional objectives and sequence of events. We
distinguish two organizational structures:
(1) Division A and division B operate separately and independently (standalone option). Each is funded directly and independently in a competitive credit
market.
(2) Division A and division B are integrated in one firm and funded as a conglomerate. In this case both divisions co-insure each other.7
We assume that the two-divisional firm will default only if the projects of both
divisions fail. This incorporates co-insurance in the model.8
An important feature of our model is the free-riding due to a moral-hazard-inteams effect (see Holmström, 1982). We have each division being run by its own
manager. Given the absence of synergies, the natural assumption is that divisional
managers care only about the returns of their own division. This introduces the
moral-hazard-in-teams effect with conglomeration. In particular, in the absence
of an internal cost-of-capital allocation mechanism, the funding cost of each division only partially reflects the risk choices made by that division. That is, the
consequences of each division’s decisions are shared by all, since the market only
assesses the overall riskiness of the firm. A division therefore can increase its
risk without being fully charged for the incremental cost, even if external market
discipline is perfect.
The sequence of events is as follows. Prior to t = 0 the organizational structure
of the firm is chosen. At t = 0 the divisions’ activities are funded, and both divisions invest $1. Subsequently, the manager of division A chooses the division’s
monitoring intensity. At t = 1 cash flows are realized and repayments are made.
C. Determination of interest rates and market discipline. The funding costs
are determined in a competitive capital market such that the lenders earn zero
6

Observe that this implies that F cannot be expropriated from division A or redistributed ex post
without complete loss in value. F can be thought of as the future profits arising from investing in
proprietary information or other division-specific investments. Alternatively, the loss of the value F
could be interpreted as a bankruptcy cost.
7 Observe that we have a simple two-divisional structure and therefore can say little about the relative
advantages of different organizational forms within a conglomerate (functional versus divisional). See
Harris and Raviv (1999) for an analysis of these issues. We assume that each divisional manager has a
comparative advantage in running his or her own division, even in a conglomerate.
8 This assumption implies that the cash flows realized by each division are sufficiently high to
facilitate full debt repayments for the conglomerate and thus survival of both divisions.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

245

profits. Under complete information, the interest factors for the stand-alone divisions A and B are
RA (m) =

1
θ + (1 − θ )m

(1)

respectively
RB =

1
.
p

(2)

For the conglomerate we have:
RC (m) =
=

1
θ + (1 − θ )m + {1 − [θ + (1 − θ)m]} p
1
.
1 − (1 − θ )(1 − m)(1 − p)

(3)

Observe that RC (m) < RA (m) and RC (m) < RB , at any level of monitoring m. This
reflects the diversification benefit of co-insurance.
We now introduce market discipline and partial observability of m. Let α ∈ [0, 1]
be the probability that the actual monitoring choice m is detected by the lender.
Lenders will then optimally adjust the funding costs to their observation of m and
thus respond to the division’s risk choice. Recall that even then m is not verifiable
and hence not contractible. This mechanism is similar to the role that credit ratings
play in the determination of funding costs. If m is not observed, all lenders can do
is rationally anticipate the firm’s privately optimal monitoring choice.
This formulation captures the notion that the market obtains information about
the credit quality of the firm over time, which then becomes reflected in the firm’s
funding cost. The parameter α reflects the amount of information and/or the speed
at which information is obtained in the market and can be used for repricing
purposes.9 It can also be interpreted as the precision of the information received
by the market. More noise obscures repricing and hence reduces market discipline.
Observe that α = 0 implies no market discipline and α = 1 implies perfect market
discipline. Firms then face the following expected funding costs:
Ri (α, m) = α Ri (m) + (1 − α)Ri ,

(4)

The degree of market discipline α may depend on the type and specificity of a division’s assets.
It represents the degree of observability of monitoring levels chosen in the division and thus reflects
the transparency of a division’s assets or operations. In our model formulation, the market perfectly
observes the firm’s risk choice with probability α. This risk choice then will be immediately incorporated
in the cost of funding for the firm. Obviously, this formulation is just to simplify matters. What we
have in mind is the interpretation emphasized in the text. Alternatively, we could have modeled the
firm’s debt maturity structure. With short-term debt and partially irreversible risk choices, a firm’s risk
choice would directly affect its future funding cost (see Flannery, 1994).
9

246

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

with i ∈ {A, C}, where m is the actual monitoring choice and α the probability
of detection. The monitoring choice affects RA (α, m) and RC (α, m) directly if
detected (via its effect on RA (m) respectively RC (m)). If the monitoring choice is
undetected, which happens with probability (1 − α), the expected funding costs
depend only on the lenders’ rational anticipation of the division’s risk choice. RA
and RC therefore do not directly depend on m. Thus, the funding cost set by the
market either only anticipates the risk choice after contracting or responds directly
to the risk choice. This implies that a firm cannot costlessly increase risk ex post.
Since the firm now bears some of the additional costs from suboptimal risk-taking,
it may be discouraged to do so. In division B no moral hazard is present, thus RB
is independent of the degree of market discipline and is as given in (2).
2.2. Analysis
Since the success probability of division B is independent of its manager’s
actions, the analysis will proceed from the perspective of division A. We start
with division A’s choice of risk, i.e., its monitoring intensity. As explained in
Section 2.1.B, the manager of division A maximizes his or her divisional return
net of private monitoring costs.
A. Risk choices in a stand-alone firm. With self-financing, the stand-alone division A maximizes [θ + (1 − θ )m](X + F) − V (m). The first-best level of monitoring intensity m ∗ chosen by the divisional manager satisfies the first order condition (1 − θ)(X + F) = V 0 (m ∗ ). This is our benchmark. With complete outside
debt financing, the manager of a stand-alone division A solves the following optimization problem:
Max[θ + (1 − θ)m](X − RA (α, m) + F) − V (m)
m

s.t. RA =

1
.
θ + (1 − θ )m
(5)

The constraint in (5) guarantees that the lenders rationally anticipate the monitoring
choice of the division. The level m̃ A of monitoring chosen follows from the first
order condition, taking into account the expression for RA (α, m) as given in (4):
∂ RA (m̃ A )
∂m
(1 − θ )(1 − α)
= V 0 (m̃ A ) ⇔ θ + (1 − θ )m̃ A =
.
(1 − θ )(X + F) − V 0 (m̃ A )

(1 − θ)(X − RA (α, m̃ A ) + F) − [θ + (1 − θ)m̃ A ]α

(6)

The following results can now be derived.
LEMMA 1. The stand-alone division A chooses too much risk, i.e., underinvests in monitoring, m̃ A < m ∗ . This underinvestment is more severe the higher the
expected funding costs.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

247

LEMMA 2. The monitoring intensity m̃ A in the stand-alone division A strictly
increases with the level of market discipline α imposed and reaches the first-best
level m ∗ if market discipline is perfect.
Lemma 1 shows the discrepancy between the first-best and the actual level of
monitoring chosen. In the absence of market discipline, the financial market can
only passively anticipate risk choices. This will aggravate moral hazard. Lemma 2
shows that market discipline mitigates moral hazard by creating a mechanism for ex
post settling up. This will make the manager reluctant to reduce monitoring effort.
With perfect market discipline (α = 1), the divisional manager fully internalizes
the consequences of his or her monitoring decision and first best obtains.
B. Risk choices in a conglomerate. If divisions A and B are integrated in a
conglomerate firm, the manager of division A determines his or her monitoring
choice by solving the following optimization problem:10
Max[θ + (1 − θ)m](X − RC (α, m)) + {[θ + (1 − θ )m]
m

+ (1 − [θ + (1 − θ)m]) p}F − V (m)

s.t. RC =

1
.
1 − (1 − θ )(1 − m)(1 − p)
(7)

Observe that the future rents F are available even if division A fails, as long as
division B is successful; i.e., the divisions A and B co-insure each other. Let m̃ C
be division A’s monitoring choice in a conglomerate. The first-order condition for
division A can be expressed as follows:
(1 − θ)(X − RA (α, m̃ C ) + F) − [θ + (1 − θ )m̃ C ]α

∂ RA (m̃ C )
∂m

+ (1 − θ)[RA (α, m̃ C ) − RC (α, m̃ C )] − (1 − θ ) p F − [θ + (1 − θ )m̃ C ]α
¸
·
∂ RC (m̃ C ) ∂ RA (m̃ C )
(8)
−
= V 0 (m̃ C ).
×
∂m
∂m
We have rearranged the terms in (8) to disentangle the various effects that distinguish the conglomerate from the stand-alone case. We first derive the following
result.
10 As in the stand-alone case, the manager maximizes his or her divisional return. The specification
incorporates co-insurance benefits; e.g., when division A fails and division B succeeds, bankruptcy
is averted and future rents F are preserved. Observe that the specification in (7) does not include a
subsidy from division A to division B in case the latter defaults. It is somewhat arbitrary whether or
not the manager of division A would take such a subsidy into account. We have assumed here that
the manager cares about his or her own payoffs and not about the subsequent reallocations of profits.
Alternatively, we could have introduced such subsidies in (7). This would, however, not have affected
our results qualitatively. We will return to the divisional manager’s objective function in Section 3.2,
where we discuss incentive contracting issues.

248

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

LEMMA 3. The impact of market discipline on division A as part of a conglomerate (two-divisional) firm at any given level of monitoring m is strictly less than
its impact on division A as a stand-alone activity.
The intuition is that in a conglomerate firm the consequences of division A’s
moral hazard are shared by both divisions. Division A’s funding cost therefore
only partially reflects its monitoring choice. In other words, the overall expected
pooled funding cost RC (α, m) reflects division A’s risk choices less than RA (α, m)
does for any given level of m. As a consequence, market discipline will be less
effective in a conglomerate, even if we maintain our assumption that outsiders can
detect the monitoring choices of each division as easily in the conglomerate as in
the stand-alone case.11
How does conglomeration affect the monitoring choice of division A? This can
be analyzed by comparing (6) to (8). Observe that the first two terms on the left
hand side (LHS) of Eq. (8), which can also be found in (6), specify the marginal
return to monitoring effort of division A as a stand-alone firm. Conglomeration
introduces three additional effects:
—First, a diversification effect of co-insurance, represented in the third term
on the LHS of Eq. (8). This diversification effect results from the lower funding
costs RC (α, m) of a two-divisional firm and positively affects division A’s choice
of monitoring.12
—Second, an incentive effect of co-insurance, represented in the fourth term on
the LHS of Eq. (8). The co-insurance effect guarantees that division A may capture
its future rents F even if it fails. This occurs whenever division B is successful.
Division A therefore can free-ride on division B in a two-divisional firm. This
effect induces division A to increase risk, i.e., reduce monitoring;
—Third, an incentive effect due to a reduction in the impact of external market
discipline, represented in the fifth term on the LHS of Eq. (8). This induces additional free-riding and adds to the negative incentive effect from co-insurance; it
adversely affects division A’s choice of monitoring and thus increases risk.
We now have the following two results.
PROPOSITION 1. (i) For a given level of market discipline α, the monitoring
intensity chosen by division A is higher (=lower risk) in a conglomerate than as
a stand-alone firm for rents F below a threshold F . If F > F , the reverse is true.
∂F
¯ (higher ¯α) shrinks the region
Furthermore, ∂α¯ < 0. Thus, more market discipline
11 One would expect that a conglomerate obscures the decisions taken in individual divisions. The
reduced transparency, which is effectively a reduction in α, would further undermine market discipline
in a conglomerate. Observe that this would strengthen the result in Lemma 3.
12 From Eq. (3) it is clear that R (α, m) < R (α, m) for a given m ∈ [0, 1], due to the diversification
C
A
benefits from co-insurance. However, division A may choose a different effort level m̃ C in a conglomerate firm from the level m̃ A selected in the stand-alone case. The inequality RC (α, m̃ C ) < RA (α, m̃ A )
continues to hold if and only if m̃ C > (m̃ A − p)/(1 − p), i.e., if the effort level chosen in a conglomerate
firm is still sufficiently high, although it may be lower than in a stand-alone firm.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

249

for which conglomeration produces more monitoring. (ii) For a given level of rents
F, division A chooses a higher monitoring intensity in a conglomerate if market
discipline α is below a threshold α ; the reverse holds for α > α . Furthermore,
∂α
¯
< 0. Thus, higher rents diminish¯the region for which conglomeration
increases
∂ ¯F
monitoring.
The first part of the proposition can be explained as follows. The choice of
monitoring intensity made by division A results from a trade-off between the
positive diversification effect and the negative incentive effects. If the level of
capitalized future rents F is high, the negative incentive effects are dominant and
division A’s monitoring intensity is reduced relative to the stand-alone case. For
smaller values of rents, the diversification effect is dominant, resulting in lower risk
(higher monitoring intensity) in a conglomerate. The intuition is that high values of
rents induce substantial monitoring in the stand-alone case. Conglomeration then
worsens incentives and leads to lower monitoring because rents are less at risk (that
is, the negative incentive effect of co-insurance dominates). For low values of rents,
limited liability induces low monitoring in the stand-alone case. Conglomeration
then helps by mitigating the impact of limited liability (that is, the diversification
∂F
effect of co-insurance dominates). The comparative statics result ∂α¯ < 0 shows that
with more market discipline, conglomeration worsens incentives for lower values
of rents. In the limit, we have:
COROLLARY 1 (Perfect market discipline). With perfect market discipline
(α = 1), a stand-alone division attains first-best monitoring but a conglomerate
does not.
The intuition is straightforward. Nearly perfect market discipline does not leave
much value to conglomeration. That is, with perfect market discipline, the standalone firm fully internalizes its monitoring choice. At the other extreme, with no
market discipline, the prospects for conglomeration are best, resulting in a large
interval of values of F for which conglomeration improves incentives.
The intuition for the second part of Proposition 1 is analogous. If the stand-alone
division A is subject to little market discipline (low α), conglomeration improves
division A’s monitoring incentives, although the effectiveness of market discipline
is further reduced (see the last term on the LHS of Eq. (8)). The reason is that then
the diversification benefits of co-insurance dominate. For higher market discipline
of the stand-alone activities (high α), the impact of the reduced effectiveness
of market discipline in a conglomerate becomes larger and will at some point
dominate the positive diversification effect of co-insurance. This results in a lower
monitoring intensity in division A in a conglomerate relative to the stand-alone
option. The proposition also shows that for higher levels of capitalized future rents
F, the interval of values of α for which risk choices are improved in a conglomerate
becomes smaller. The negative incentive effect from co-insurance then becomes
more important and aggravates the reduced effectiveness of market discipline in a
∂α
conglomerate. This explains the comparative statics result ∂ ¯F < 0.

250

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

C. Choice of organizational structure. Prior to the monitoring decision at
t = 0, both divisions decide on an organizational structure. Conglomeration is
optimal if it generates the highest aggregate surplus net of funding costs. In this
case, an optimal sharing rule between the divisions can always be found such that
both divisions prefer to be integrated in a conglomerate firm.
The choice of organizational structure is not fully determined by the comparison
of incentive effects. One other effect is at work. Conglomeration reduces the probability that future rents are lost due to default, ignoring the effect of incentives on
risk choices. This favors conglomeration. Therefore, conglomeration is preferred
when risk choices in a conglomerate are better, but also sometimes when they are
not. The following result can be derived.
PROPOSITION 2. (i) For low levels of market discipline α, conglomeration is
preferred if rents F are below a threshold F̄ (F ≤ F̄, with F̄ > F ), whereas the
¯ high levels of
stand-alone alternative is preferred if rents exceed the threshold. For
market discipline α, conglomeration is preferred for intermediate values of rents
(F0 ≤ F ≤ F̄, with F0 > F ), whereas the stand-alone alternative is preferred for
¯ (0 < F < F and F > F̄).13 (ii) For small to medium
low and high values of rents
0
levels of rents, conglomeration is preferred if market discipline is sufficiently weak
(α ≤ ᾱ, with ᾱ > α ), whereas the stand-alone alternative is preferred if market
¯ For high levels of rents, the stand-alone alternative always
discipline is strong.
dominates.
The intuition is similar to that of Proposition 1. The stand-alone division A
would benefit from committing to a higher monitoring intensity (observe that
m̃ A < m ∗ ; see Lemma 1). Conglomeration improves matters if division A benefits
sufficiently from the diversification effect of co-insurance in a conglomerate. From
Proposition 1, we know that this holds for low levels of α and relatively low values
of capitalized future rents F. Consider first part (ii) of Proposition 2. This is
analogous to Proposition 1, except that the cut-off ᾱ exceeds that in Proposition 1
(α ). Conglomeration is now optimal for a wider range of values of the market
¯
discipline
parameter α. This is because of the better preservation of future rents in
a conglomerate.
Consider now part (i) of Proposition 2. According to Proposition 1, if F is relatively high (F > F ), the negative incentive effect from co-insurance dominates
¯
and division A chooses
more risk in a conglomerate. As Proposition 2 shows,
conglomeration may then initially still be optimal because the expected value arising from the preservation of future rents exceeds the losses due to distorted risk
choices. But for F sufficiently large (i.e., for F > F̄ > F ), the negative incentive
¯
effects from co-insurance will dominate and the stand-alone
option becomes optimal. This is illustrated in the first panel of Fig. 1. Figure 1 illustrates how the extra
13 There are parametric conditions for which F and/or F̄ do not exist, i.e., for which the set (F , F̄]
0
0
is empty or for which F̄ < 0. In that case the stand-alone option is always optimal. For more details,
see the proof of Proposition 2.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

251

FIG. 1. The difference in total expected surplus between conglomeration and the stand-alone
option as a function of F.

surplus generated by conglomeration vis-à-vis the stand-alone option depends on
the level of rents F. In the figure the symbol 1 represents the difference between
the aggregate surplus generated in the case of conglomeration and the aggregate
surplus available in the stand-alone case.
For high levels of market discipline α, conglomeration always worsens incentives. However, conglomeration will still be optimal if the rents at stake are

252

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

sufficiently large (F > F0 ). If F becomes really large (F > F̄), the stand-alone option again becomes optimal, because the high rents induce maximum monitoring
and thus minimal risk in the stand-alone case. Conglomeration can then only make
matters worse. Thus, only for intermediate values of rents F can conglomeration
be optimal. This is illustrated in the second panel of Fig. 1.
We also observe from Fig. 1 that for very large values of rents F, those exceeding
F C , conglomeration and the stand-alone organizational structure converge. Such
a high value of rents induces a maximum feasible monitoring choice, with zero
default risk. This is formalized in Corollary 2.
COROLLARY 2 (Corner solution). If rents F become large (i.e., for F >F C ),
both divisions are indifferent between the stand-alone alternative and conglomeration. In both organizational structures, division A then chooses the maximum
monitoring intensity.
This result obtains because default risk disappears at high values of F. If some
default risk was to remain, even at the maximum feasible monitoring choice, the
diversification benefit of conglomeration would make the conglomerate alternative
optimal.
2.3. Numerical Example
In this section, we will illustrate our main results so far with a numerical example based on the following parameters: θ =1/2, p = 1/2, X = 2.75, Y = 4 and
V (m) = 4m 2 . The results of our numerical analysis are summarized in Table I.
Panel A presents the differences in the equilibrium risk choices in division A between the conglomerate and the stand-alone option, m̃ C − m̃ A , as a function of the
degree of market discipline α ∈ [0, 1] and the level of capitalized future rents F.
Panel B focuses on the optimal organizational structure of the divisions and shows
the difference in surplus 1 between the conglomerate and the stand-alone option
for the different levels of α and F.
The numerical results illustrate the characterizations in Propositions 1 and 2.
High rents F make the stand-alone option optimal: both improved monitoring
incentives, m̃ C − m̃ A < 0, and a higher surplus of stand-alone vis-à-vis conglomeration; see the negative numbers for 1 in Panel B. Low market discipline improves
monitoring choices in a conglomerate vis-à-vis stand-alone. In general, conglomeration is suboptimal for high levels of market discipline, except for intermediate
values of rents.
2.4. Discussion
The general insights from the Propositions 1 and 2 are summarized in Table II.
We observe from Table II that medium rents favor conglomeration, but that risk
choices are generally worse (compare Panels A and B in Table I). This discrepancy between privately optimal risk choices and the optimal choice of organizational structure occurs because conglomeration preserves the future rents more

253

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS
TABLE I
Overview of Results of Numerical Example
F
α

0.00

0.25

0.50

1.00

2.00

4.00

∞

8.00

Panel A: Differences in monitoring incentives in division A (m̃ C − m̃ A ) as a function of α and F
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00

0.0377
0.0276
0.0177
0.0081
−0.0012
−0.0102
−0.0189
−0.0273
−0.0356
−0.0435
−0.0514

0.0282
0.0183
0.0086
−0.0007
−0.0098
−0.0186
−0.0271
−0.0353
−0.0434
−0.0512
−0.0589

0.0188
0.0091
−0.0004
−0.0095
−0.0183
−0.0269
−0.0353
−0.0434
−0.0513
−0.0590
−0.0664

0.0000
−0.0092
−0.0182
−0.0270
−0.0354
−0.0436
−0.0515
−0.0593
−0.0669
−0.0743
−0.0816

−0.0369
−0.0452
−0.0534
−0.0614
−0.0692
−0.0767
−0.0840
−0.0912
−0.0982
−0.1051
−0.1118

−0.1086
−0.1155
−0.1224
−0.1291
−0.1357
−0.1422
−0.1485
−0.1546
−0.1606
−0.1665
−0.1724

−0.2462
−0.2514
−0.2564
−0.2614
−0.2662
−0.2710
−0.2757
−0.2804
−0.2849
−0.2894
−0.2938

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Panel B: Difference in expected surplus in a conglomerate vis-à-vis the stand-alone option
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00

0.0519
0.0379
0.0243
0.0111
−0.0016
−0.0140
−0.0259
−0.0376
−0.0489
−0.0599
−0.0706

0.0987
0.0835
0.0688
0.0547
0.0409
0.0276
0.0146
0.0020
−0.0103
−0.0222
−0.0339

0.1421
0.1260
0.1102
0.0951
0.0804
0.0660
0.0521
0.0386
0.0254
0.0125
−0.0001

0.2192
0.2012
0.1836
0.1664
0.1499
0.1338
0.1182
0.1028
0.0878
0.0732
0.0588

0.3347
0.3135
0.2926
0.2721
0.2521
0.2328
0.2139
0.1954
0.1772
0.1593
0.1420

0.4143
0.3879
0.3617
0.3359
0.3106
0.2858
0.2615
0.2378
0.2145
0.1915
0.1685

−0.0179
−0.0517
−0.0850
−0.1177
−0.1500
−0.1819
−0.2134
−0.2446
−0.2753
−0.3055
−0.3354

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

effectively, so that default is less likely, ceteris paribus. For very high levels of
rents, F > F C , this is unimportant because both the stand-alone structure and the
conglomerate involve low risk choices, with negligible default risk. Observe also
from Table II that with sufficiently low rents and perfect market discipline (α → 1),
TABLE II
Optimal Organizational Structure as a Function of Competitive Environment (Inverse of Rents F)
and Market Discipline/Transparency (α)
F
α

Low

Medium

High

F>F C

Low
High

Conglomerate
Conglomerate or
stand-alone
Stand-alone

Conglomerate
Conglomerate or
stand-alone
Conglomerate or
stand-alone

Stand-alone
Stand-alone

Indifferent
Indifferent

Stand-alone

Indifferent

Limit
α→1

254

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

the stand-alone alternative is preferred. While this limiting case is of interest in
itself, combinations of low and medium–high levels of market discipline and rents
may best characterize most real-world industries. A general implication from Table II is that conglomeration is an optimal response to increasing competition
unless market discipline becomes nearly perfect.
On a more fundamental level, firms may differ in asset-specificity and operate
in different competitive environments. Asset-specificity could well be linked to
transparency. High asset-specificity can give rise to proprietary information and
lack of transparency, and hence little market discipline. This favors a conglomerate
type of organization for such type of activity.14
On a different note, the characterization in Table II also leads to insights about
the heterogeneity of activities that should be combined in a conglomerate. Our
analysis suggests that activities with low and high asset-specificity should not
be mixed together. Assets with low asset-specificity benefit most from a standalone organization and exploit the considerable amount of market discipline. High
asset-specificity activities should then only be combined with other high assetspecificity activities and would jointly benefit from the positive incentive effects
of diversification.

3. INTERNAL ALLOCATION OF COST OF CAPITAL
AND INCENTIVE CONTRACTING ISSUES
In this section we analyze the impact of an internal cost-of-capital allocation
mechanism on division A’s risk choice in a conglomerate and on the choice of organizational structure. We subsequently address how the use of incentive contracts
(i.e., managerial compensation mechanisms) could affect our analysis. In particular, we will discuss whether the incentives in a conglomerate could be replicated by
stand-alone divisions without a change in organizational structure and vice versa.
3.1. Internal Allocation of Cost of Capital
From Section 2 it is clear that integrating separate divisions in a conglomerate
firm is desirable if it results in better monitoring choices in the divisions. If not,
free-riding dominates, leading to high risk, and the two divisions may prefer to
operate as stand-alone entities. Potentially valuable diversification benefits may
then remain unexploited. The source of this inefficiency is the reduction in market
discipline following conglomeration that outweighs the potential diversification
benefits. An increase in the impact of market discipline in a conglomerate firm
therefore could reduce free-riding and facilitate socially desirable integration.
14 A different perspective appears in Rajan and Myers (1998). In their work liquid assets, i.e., those
with low asset-specificity, are most difficult to monitor for reasons of excessive managerial discretion.
That is, managers could easily run away with these assets. We do not focus on these managerial
agency-problems.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

255

In this section, we show that an internal cost-of-capital allocation mechanism
could create internal discipline that complements external market discipline. In
particular, the impact of a given level of market discipline on division A’s choice
of monitoring intensity can be increased by an internal allocation of the cost of
capital to the respective divisions by a CEO. We assume that the CEO acts in the
interest of the shareholders of the conglomerate firm.
We will proceed as follows. Recall that in Section 2 the same interest rate factor
RC (α, m) was charged to each division. This is now going to change. The internal
allocation of cost of capital is introduced in the following way. The CEO first
allocates different charges to the two divisions to reflect intrinsic differences in
riskiness. This alone, however, does not restore market discipline. For this, it is
necessary to increase the sensitivity parameter in the cost of capital charged to
division A with respect to the monitoring choice m. That is, the CEO internally
leverages the external market discipline parameter α. Observe that even if the
CEO is not better informed than outsiders, he or she could improve matters by
undoing the diluted market discipline in the conglomerate. In that case, the total
degree of market discipline that division A is subjected to in a conglomerate firm
is α(∂ RA (m)/∂m), which is the same as in the stand-alone case (see Eq. (4)).
If the CEO does not do anything, the diluted external market discipline equals
α̂ ≡ α(∂ RC (m)/∂m)/(∂ RA (m)/∂m); clearly α̂ < α. If the CEO has better information than outsiders, the total (internal and external) market discipline could become
even larger than in the stand-alone case. This is implicitly the case in Stein (1997)
where the CEO engages in winner-picking and can reallocate scarce resources
between competing projects in a conglomerate.
We assume that the CEO assigns a sensitivity parameter β to the cost of capital
charged to division A. Similar to α, the parameters and α̂ and β are expressed
as sensitivity parameters vis-à-vis the interest rate charged to the division in a
conglomerate firm. The total degree of market discipline that division A is subject
to then equals α̂(1 − β) + β. This specification shows that internal and external
market discipline are complements: a higher α̂ and/or β increase discipline. If the
sensitivity parameter β equals zero, each division is subject only to external market
discipline of the diluted degree α̂. If the CEO makes each division fully accountable
for its risk choice by assigning β = 1, then discipline is perfect. For intermediate
values of the sensitivity parameter β, the total degree of market discipline lies
between α̂ and 1. The expected cost of capital charged to division A can now be
denoted by RA (α̂(1 − β) + β, m), with ∂ RA (α̂(1 − β) + β, m)/∂m = [α̂(1 − β) +
β](∂ RA (m)/∂m). Similarly, the funding cost of the conglomerate firm is RC (α̂(1 −
β) + β, m). In this specification, each division is being charged for its own default
risk. The following result can be derived.
LEMMA 4. A differential charge reflecting intrinsic differences in riskiness will
elevate the nominal funding cost. This will worsen division A’s incentives.
The intuition for this lemma is that passively increasing capital charges worsens
incentives. That is, charging a division for its anticipated higher risk induces even

256

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

more risk-taking in this division. It highlights the adverse outcomes that occur
with moral hazard.15 An internal cost-of-capital allocation can be effective only if
sufficient discipline is imposed as well. Here the sensitivity factor α̂(1 − β) + β
becomes important. We now have Proposition 3.
PROPOSITION 3. Internal discipline (β > 0) strictly improves division A’s incentives in a conglomerate, enlarging the range of values of the future rents F for
∂F
which conglomeration improves incentives and thus is optimal. That is, ∂β¯ > 0,
where F is the threshold below which conglomeration improves incentives (see
¯
Proposition
1).
The result in Proposition 3 underscores the potential effectiveness of internal
discipline. We can also show:
COROLLARY 3. With full internal discipline, β = 1, market discipline α is
redundant, and first best attains; division A chooses the first-best monitoring
intensity.
Corollary 3 together with Proposition 3 shows that internal discipline β complements, and ultimately may replace, market discipline α. In the limit, when β is
one, internal discipline is perfect and market discipline α becomes redundant.
3.2. Incentive Contracting Issues
In our analysis, the manager of a stand-alone division maximizes the division’s
expected surplus net of funding costs. The manager thus maximizes shareholder
value. This is basically equivalent to the manager receiving an equity-linked compensation contract. Observe that with an equity-linked compensation contract, the
manager is induced to take more risk to the detriment of the debtholder. Could
managers be induced to maximize firm value? The problem is that shareholders can
not credibly design a managerial compensation structure that induces the manager
to maximize firm value. This is because shareholders have an incentive to renegotiate such a compensation contract ex post (after debt financing is obtained). Also,
bond covenants are not effective in the context of our model. The nonverifiability
of the monitoring choice makes covenants impossible to enforce.16 The manager
15

Observe that the internal allocation of cost of capital now gives each division an expected funding
cost that is identical to what would have been charged in the stand-alone case. We could have chosen to
pass on some diversification benefits in the allocated funding cost. However, this would not have changed
the qualitative result in Lemma 4. That is, charging for anticipated risk taking worsens incentives.
16 As in Boot et al. (1993), we could allow for discretionary covenants in bond contracts, such as,
for example, the material adverse change (MAC) clause in loan commitments. The viability of these
contracts, however, depends crucially on reputational considerations. Observe also that real world
MAC clauses are contingent on verifiable characteristics of the borrower; see Avery and Berger (1991).
Hence, the applicability of such clauses in the context of our model is limited. What may help, however,
is to introduce dynamic considerations. For example, if the firm deals with financiers regularly (rather
than the static case analyzed in this paper), the firm may want to build a reputation for not engaging in
asset substitution, i.e., for making value-maximizing decisions.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

257

in the stand-alone case can thus not be motivated to choose an optimal monitoring
level.17
Precommitment problems between managers and shareholders also preclude
cross-subsidization between stand-alone firms in the case of default. That is,
the ex post unwillingness of the shareholders of a stand-alone division to crosssubsidize a defaulting division makes incentive contracts which replicate the coinsurance in a conglomerate infeasible ex ante. Interestingly, it is exactly this
cross-subsidization (co-insurance) that generates the benefits of conglomeration;
the time-inconsistency problem is effectively resolved by conglomeration. By having a claim on a conglomerate firm, a shareholder credibly precommits to crosssubsidize a defaulting division in a conglomerate. This way conglomeration serves
as a credible precommitment device for co-insurance.
These conclusions are reminiscent of the findings in Ramakrishnan and Thakor
(1991), who compare the benefits of diversification (cooperation) with those achieved by stand-alone incentive contracting mechanisms (competition) and also
conclude that conglomeration and the use of managerial compensation contracts
are optimal under different circumstances. Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1991) consider a risk-neutral principal who must motivate two risk-averse agents to make
unobservable effort choices that stochastically affect output. The principal can
choose between having the agents operate independently (stand-alone) or having
them cooperate in a conglomerate (integration). In Ramakrishnan and Thakor, the
correlation between the idiosyncratic returns dictates whether conglomeration is
desirable. If this correlation is not too high, conglomeration helps in improving
the precision of incentive contracts for divisional managers. That is, co-insurance
reduces noise in the remuneration contract of risk-averse managers.18 This is similar in spirit to our results: we show that co-insurance mitigates limited liability,
which points at the optimality of conglomeration.
We could also ask the question whether a stand-alone firm could replicate the
diversification benefits of conglomeration by hedging its default risk with a third
party in the financial market. For example, the manager of division A could enter
into a contract in which he or she receives an amount equal to the cross-subsidy
from division B in the case division A defaults and/or pays an amount equal to
the cross-subsidy to division B if B defaults. Observe, however, that the division’s
default risk depends on the divisional manager’s monitoring intensity m and thus is
(partly) endogenous. Hedging such risks is problematic, since a market for trading
firm-specific default risk is subject to rampant moral hazard problems.
17 Observe that ideally we would like to induce managers to maximize firm value. This could explain
why incentive contracts are not as sensitive to equity value as theory predicts (see John and John, 1993).
Simultaneously, however, we would like to induce managers to choose optimal effort. The latter desire
could ask for equity-linked compensation. The problem of the design of managerial compensation is
thus complex. Some general results regarding managerial compensation mechanisms are derived in
Holmström (1979) and Harris and Raviv (1979).
18 See also Aron (1988). The questions she asks are similar to those in Ramakrishnan and Thakor
(1991), but her analysis is different in that she compares independently run businesses to a conglomerate
run by a single manager and examines when the latter is optimal relative to performance contracting.

258

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

We next turn to the issue of the optimal design of incentive contracts in multidivisional firms. This issue is central in a sizeable literature that examines the benefits
and drawbacks of forming teams in agency contexts; see, for example, Holmström
(1982). Holmström addresses the merits of relative performance evaluation and
finds that relative performance contracts can reduce moral hazard costs by allowing
for better risk sharing if the outputs of different activities are correlated. If outputs
are independent, and each activity’s output can be observed separately, the optimal
compensation schedule for each agent depends solely on his or her own output.19
These results provide a foundation for the divisional objective functions that we
use in the case of conglomeration. The divisional managers are compensated based
on the net payoff of their own division and thus receive an equity type of claim in
their division. As indicated above, such a claim would be optimal if the outputs of
the activities in divisions A and B are uncorrelated and can be observed separately
by the principal (e.g., the CEO).
The analysis above helps explain the increasing importance and popularity of
equity-linked internal compensation mechanisms in multidivisional firms (e.g.,
EVA or economic profit). Two drawbacks, however, should be mentioned. First,
although divisional-payoff-related compensation mechanisms may improve a divisional manager’s incentives, the effectiveness of such incentive contracts may be
hampered by influence activities (see, e.g., Milgrom and Roberts, 1990, Rajan and
Zingales, 1999, and Wulf, 1998). These influence activities would be mitigated
if each division would optimize the total surplus of the conglomerate firm. However, managerial effort aversion is typically best dealt with by linking the manager’s
compensation to only his or her own divisional output (Holmström, 1982). Second,
compensating the divisional manager based on a divisional equity claim instead of
the traded equity of the conglomerate limits the possibility for information feedback and performance monitoring by the market (see Holmström and Tirole, 1993,
and Milbourn, 1999). Both drawbacks point to the limitations in using managerial
performance contracts in conglomerate firms and imply that a conglomerate firm
is unlikely to be able to mimic the incentives provided by stand-alone divisions.
4. BANKING: PROPRIETARY TRADING VERSUS
RELATIONSHIP BANKING
4.1. Introduction
In this section, we adapt our analysis to the potential conflict between transaction- and relationship-oriented activities in banking as briefly discussed in
19

Holmström and Milgrom (1990) obtain similar results, allowing for cooperation (team effort)
and potential information sharing between agents in a multidivisional firm. They find that cooperation
between agents can be beneficial if the agents can monitor each other and have better information
than the principal (see also Varian, 1990). Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1991) and Itoh (1991) discuss
the benefits of cooperation in the absence of correlation between the outputs of different activities. In
these papers agents can supply effort to facilitate each other’s activities and can thus engage in team
production with interdependent incentive schemes.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

259

Section 1. Observe that many banking activities are relationship oriented. Proprietary trading activities, however, are different and involve arbitrage between
different markets and/or different financial products. These trading activities involve substantial risks. Thus, establishing the fair risk-adjusted cost of funds is
important. This cost might, given the specific nature of the trading activities, differ
substantially from the cost of funds of the bank as a whole. Moreover, relationshiporiented banking typically has a longer-term scope. The bank may need to heavily
invest in relationships at the outset, in order to benefit in the longer term. A link
therefore can be expected between relationship-specific effort exerted now and
the possibility to benefit from this in a later period. The activities in the trading
division are more short-term oriented and do not depend on relationship-specific
effort. In a multidivisional bank, however, the risk choices of the trading division
may have an impact on the relationship-banking division, by affecting the risk and
survival probability of the bank as a whole.
In the context of our model, we now activate division B as a proprietary trading
division (i.e., we endogenize division B’s risk choice) and interpret division A
as the relationship-banking division. Our primary focus is on how the choices
of trading division B may undermine the choices made by relationship-banking
division A.
4.2. Specification and Analysis
As before, division A, the relationship-banking activity, chooses its monitoring
intensity m, generating a payoff X with probability θ + (1 − θ )m, and zero otherwise. Division A is subject to external market discipline of a degree αA ∈ [0, 1].
The capitalized value of future rents is now F(m), with F 0 (m) > 0 and F 00 (m) < 0.
The dependence of F on the monitoring intensity m captures some of the future
benefits of relationship-specific investments and generalizes the exogenous value
of F as used before.
Division B, the proprietary trading activity, generates an end-of-period return
Y ( p) with probability p, where p can now be chosen ( p was fixed before). We let
Y 0 ( p) < 0 and Y 00 ( p) > 0, such that pY ( p) has an interior maximum. The degree of
external market discipline imposed on division B is αB ∈ [0, 1]. Analogous to the
analysis in Section 2, two different organizational structures can be distinguished:
stand-alone or conglomerate. The funding costs are as specified in (1) through (3).
Observe that the pooling rate is now RC (α, m, p) per dollar invested and depends
on the risk choices in both divisions, m and p.
If division B operates as a stand-alone firm, it maximizes p[Y ( p) − RB (α, p)].
In a conglomerate, it maximizes p[Y ( p) − RC (α, m̃ C , p)]. Define p̃ B as division
B’s privately-optimal risk choice as a stand-alone firm and p̃ C as its risk choice in
a conglomerate. We can now derive the following result.
PROPOSITION 4. Given division A’s optimal monitoring choice in a conglomerate, there may exist a threshold level of market discipline α B such that, for
α B > α B , the proprietary trading division B chooses strictly¯ more risk in a
¯

260

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

conglomerate than as a stand-alone activity. For α B ≤ α B the opposite holds and
¯
division B chooses less risk in a conglomerate.
Proposition 4 shows that from the perspective of division B also, effective market
discipline of stand-alone activities discourages conglomeration. However, whenever we start out with very low market discipline of stand-alone activities (low αB ),
the beneficial effects of diversification dominate, and the risk choices in division
B are better in a conglomerate. Proposition 4 is in the spirit of our earlier results.
In the determination of the optimal organizational structure, similar issues play a
role as before. Both divisions choose the organizational structure of their operations
at t = 0, anticipating their incentives and the funding costs conditional on each
organizational structure. Several cases can be distinguished. We will focus on the
most stringent case with B choosing more risk in a conglomerate than as a standalone activity (α B < αB < 1). We can show:
¯
PROPOSITION 5 (Active trading division B). Excessive (vis-à-vis stand-alone)
risk-taking in the trading division B makes conglomeration less attractive. The
relationship banking division A then will only benefit from conglomeration if it
faces sufficiently low market discipline. Otherwise, the stand-alone alternative is
optimal.
This proposition generalizes Proposition 1. Proposition 5 can be illustrated with
a simple numerical example.20 Assume, as before, that θ = 1/2, X = 2.75 and
V (m) = 4m 2 . Furthermore, let F(m) = 0.5m 1/2 and Y ( p) = 3( p − 2)2 . With these
assumptions, it can be shown that division B chooses more risk in a conglomerate ( p̃ C < p̃ B ) for any αB larger than approximately 0.37 (=α B ). This worsens
incentives in division A compared to the case where division¯ B is exogenous.
Division A now lowers its monitoring (m̃ C < m̃ A ) in case of conglomeration for a
wider range of values of αA . That is, the cut-off value α A below which division
¯
A’s incentives improve in the case of conglomeration decreases.
For example, if
αB = 0.80, α A would equal 0.49, whereas in the absence of free-riding by division B α A¯ would equal 0.52. These negative incentive effects undermine the
¯ of relationship banking activities, and conglomeration becomes less
added value
attractive.
Our example also shows that the stronger the effect of monitoring m on the future
rents F(m), the lower the benefits of conglomeration. For example, if we let m
affect F(m) more, say F(m) = 6m 1/2 , conglomeration always worsens monitoring
choices in division A and is never optimal. These results show that relationshipspecific activities may suffer from the proprietary trading activity and underscore
the necessity of an internal allocation of the cost of capital.
Observe also that Propositions 4 and 5 may underestimate the consequences
of risk-taking in the proprietary trading division B. This is because we have assumed that division A defaults less often as part of a conglomerate bank than
20 For a summary of all the possible combinations of risk choices and choices of organizational
structure, see the proof of Proposition 5 and the numerical example in the Appendix.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

261

as a stand-alone entity. We next allow the proprietary trading division B to increase the default probability of division A and that of the conglomerate bank as a
whole.
Consider the following simple alteration of the model. Let δ be the dilution
factor in the success probability of the relationship lending division A. We assume
that default in the proprietary trading division reduces the success probability of
the relationship lending division from θ + (1 − θ )m to [θ + (1 − θ )m](1 − δ), with
δ ∈ (0, 1]. The survival probability of the conglomerate bank now becomes equal
to p + [θ + (1 − θ)m](1 − p)(1 − δ). With δ = 0.30 in our numerical example, it
can be shown that the incentives for excessive risk-taking in both divisions of the
conglomerate bank increase. Division A now always reduces its monitoring for
αA larger than approximately 0.35, whereas B increases its risk for αB > 0.36.
The intuition is that the possible dissipative impact of default of division B on
the survival probability of the overall bank increases the pooled funding costs
RC (α, m, p) of the conglomerate bank. This induces division A to prefer the standalone alternative more often.
Propositions 4 and 5 and the numerical example illuminate key aspects of the
Barings debacle. Proprietary trading within a conglomerate bank may suffer from
a lack of market discipline, and as a result, excessive risk-taking occurs that undermines the relationship-specific activities. The latter effect is the key insight that
this section adds to the general analysis in Section 2.

5. FURTHER IMPLICATIONS AND EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
In this section we discuss further implications of our analysis and relate our
insights to the existing empirical evidence.
5.1. The Diversification Discount
Several empirical papers have documented that diversified firms trade, on average, at a discount relative to a portfolio of specialized single segment firms. The
market value of a diversified firm appears to be approximately 13–15% less than
the sum of its segments valued separately, see Berger and Ofek (1995). Similarly,
Lang and Stulz (1994) provide evidence that during the 1980s Tobin’s q of diversified firms was significantly smaller than the q of matching portfolios of specialized
firms. Most of the existing contributions suggest that this diversification discount
results from misallocations of capital and inefficient cross-subsidies between divisions in a conglomerate firm. Berger and Ofek (1995) find that conglomerate firms
overinvest in industries with limited investment opportunities, as measured by a
low Tobin’s q ratio. Also cross-subsidization of poorly-performing divisions by
better-performing divisions is common. In the context of the oil industry, Lamont
(1997) has shown that investments in nonoil segments of oil firms respond to the
cash flows of other segments when an unanticipated oil shock occurs. He finds that

262

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

following the adverse oil shock in 1986, capital expenditures in nonoil segments
were drastically reduced, while abundant oil-related profits facilitated subsidies
to these activities in 1985. This suggests that diversified companies tend to subsidize and overinvest in poorly-performing segments. Also, Shin and Stulz (1998)
provide evidence that the investment by a segment of a diversified firm depends
on the cash flow of other segments. In particular, they find that the investment by
segments of highly-diversified firms is larger and less sensitive to their own cash
flow than the investment of comparable single-segment firms and is unrelated to
the relative quality of their investment opportunities.
To the extent that the internal incentive problems in a conglomerate firm dominate the benefits of diversification, our analysis also explains the existence of a
diversification discount. Contrary to the literature discussed above, however, this
discount arises in our analysis even if conglomeration does not change the allocation of capital to the individual divisions for investment purposes. We show that
incentive problems in a conglomerate could reduce the cash flows generated by
each of these divisions and explain the diversification discount.
Rajan et al. (2000) emphasize that, even though conglomerates trade at a discount
on average, 39.3% of the conglomerates trade at a premium. They explain this
by power considerations and show that a diversified firm sometimes allocates
capital in the right direction and sometimes in the wrong direction, depending on
the interrelation of the segments within the firm. In general, dispersion between
segments in the diversified firm is bad. Diversified firms can trade at a premium if
the dispersion between segments is low. These conclusions are roughly consistent
with our observations in Section 2.4, where we argue that heterogeneity of activities
is generally bad for conglomeration.21
5.2. Conglomeration in Developed and Developing Economies
Empirical evidence presented in Khanna and Palepu (1997) suggests that conglomeration is, on average, beneficial in developing economies and less beneficial
in more developed countries. Since developing countries may lack transparency
and hence have a low degree of market discipline α, this is consistent with our predictions. But more might be going on. As indicated in Khanna and Palepu (1997),
conglomerates may add value in developing economies by imitating the external
market discipline that can be found in more developed economies. This translates
into a high value of β in our analysis. An explanation could be the important role
of families in the funding of corporations and the scarcity of outside financing
opportunities in developing economies. This could make conglomeration more
attractive.

21 An effect that we have not taken into account in our analysis is that the mere fact of conglomeration
may reduce competition and increase the rents F. This effect would amplify the potential benefits of
conglomeration.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

263

5.3. Applications to Corporations: Spinoffs and Equity Carve-Outs
Our analysis of incentive problems in conglomerate firms could also explain the
empirically documented positive stock price reactions to spinoffs and equity carveouts (see, e.g., Schipper and Smith, 1986, and Daley et al., 1997). In the absence of
any synergies, spinoffs and divestitures are optimal if the negative incentive effects
associated with conglomeration dominate the diversification benefits. Selling off
individual divisions then mitigates free-riding and increases the effectiveness of
market discipline. Evidence in Daley et al. (1997) suggests that the value created
by spinoffs is higher if the spun-off entity is in a different industry. This is in line
with our argument against the conglomeration of heterogeneous activities.
Equity carve-outs can capture the benefits of both worlds. In these transactions,
also known as partial public offerings, firms sell a minority interest in the common
stock of a previously wholly-owned subsidiary. For example, Thermo Electron
spins off any division that grows sufficiently large, but continues to own 80% of its
equity; 20% of the subsidiary’s equity is traded separately and owned outside the
firm (see Allen, 1998). Equity carve-outs thus allow for co-insurance and diversification benefits, while at the same time exposing the subsidiary to direct market
discipline. Schipper and Smith (1986) found that equity carve-outs are associated
with significant positive stock returns and suggest that carve-outs resolve ex ante
informational problems (i.e., undervaluation of a wholly-incorporated subsidiary).
Our analysis suggests a complementary explanation: equity carve-outs can attenuate ex post incentive distortions.
These arguments raise questions as to why we do not observe more equity carveouts and, more generally, whether equity carve-outs with conglomeration dominate
other organizational structures. A tentative answer to this question is that this is
likely to depend on the interplay between internal and external market discipline.
Equity carve-outs increase the effectiveness of external market discipline, but can
at the same time decrease the quality of the internal information flow between
subsidiary and parent and as a consequence make internal discipline less effective.
This again points to the importance of internal cost-of-capital allocation schemes
and helps explain the increased use of metrics like EVA and RAROC.
6. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has focused on the incentive effects of conglomeration. Incentive
problems sometimes dictate integration of activities as in a conglomerate, but favor stand-alone activities when there is perfect market discipline. We have shown
that conglomeration has benefits that compensate for ineffective market discipline. In particular, diversification benefits can effectively relax the limited liability
constraint such that adverse risk-taking incentives are mitigated. However, conglomeration also weakens market discipline and invites free-riding. An effective
internal cost-of-capital allocation mechanism could then be useful in mitigating
these effects.

264

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

Apart from market discipline, the competitiveness of the industry also turns out
to be a factor. We have shown that the case for conglomeration is stronger in a
more competitive environment. We believe that these results are important and help
illuminate corporate practices. More research is needed, however. In particular,
alternative organizational structures need to be considered. Our modeling of standalone and conglomeration as well-defined (extreme) organizational structures is
obviously a simplification. Real-world organizations are often hybrids of various
sorts. Joint ventures, cross-holdings, and equity carve-outs are examples. These
structures have some of the costs and benefits of stand-alone and conglomerate
structures. Future research should examine these intermediate structures.

APPENDIX
Proof of Lemma 1. With complete self-financing division A’s optimal monitoring choice m ∗ satisfies:
(1 − θ)(X + F) = V 0 (m ∗ ),

(A.1)

where m ∗ ≡ m ∗ (θ, X, F) with ∂m ∗ /∂θ < 0, ∂m ∗ /∂ X > 0 and ∂m ∗ /∂ F > 0, since
V 00 (m) > 0 ∀m ∈ [0, 1]. In the case of outside financing at the funding rate
RA (α, m) division A’s optimal monitoring choice m̃ A satisfies the first order condition (6), which can be written as:
(1 − θ )(X + F) = V 0 (m) + (1 − θ)(1 − α)RA

(A.2)

and the necessary second order condition V 00 (m̃ A ) > 0. Note that RA = RA (α, m̃ A )
in equilibrium (see Eq. (5)). The second term on the RHS of (A.2) is larger than zero
∀m ∈ [0, 1]. Due to the convexity of V (m) it can be seen that V 0 (m̃ A ) < V 0 (m ∗ ) implies that m̃ A < m ∗ . Furthermore, since ∂[V 0 (m ∗ ) − V 0 (m̃ A )]/∂ RA = (1 − θ )(1 −
α) > 0, (m ∗ − m̃ A ) increases with RA .
Proof of Lemma 2. Observe that m̃ A ≡ m̃ A (α, θ, X, F). Since the second term
on the RHS of (A.2) decreases monotonically with α and V 00 (m) > 0, ∂ m̃ A /∂α > 0.
For α = 1 the first order condition equals (A.1), and the optimal monitoring choice
equals m ∗ . Alternatively, this result can be derived from totally differentiating
Eq. (6) with respect to α. For completeness, note that ∂ m̃ A /∂ X > 0, ∂ m̃ A /∂ F > 0
and ∂ m̃ A /∂θ < 0 if V 0 (m) is sufficiently high, i.e., if V 0 (m) > (1 − θ )2 (1 −
m)(1 − α)/[θ + (1 − θ)m]2 .
Proof of Lemma 3. This result follows from differentiating RA (α, m) and
RC (α, m) with respect to m. Since p ∈ [0, 1] it can be seen that ∀m ∈ [0, 1]:

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

265

¯
¯
¯ ∂ RC (α, m) ¯
α(1 − θ )(1 − p)
¯=
¯
¯
¯
∂m
{θ + (1 − θ )m + (1 − [θ + (1 − θ )m]) p}2
¯
¯
¯ ∂ RA (α, m) ¯
α(1 − θ )
¯
¯
<
=¯
¯
[θ + (1 − θ)m]2
∂m
Proof of Proposition 1. Recall that m̃ A and m̃ C represent the solutions to division A’s optimization problem if it operates respectively as a stand-alone firm
and as part of a conglomerate firm. Then for the stand-alone case Eq. (6) and the
second order condition are given by
(1 − θ)(X + F) − (1 − θ )RA (α, m̃ A )
− [θ + (1 − θ)m̃ A ]

∂ RA (α, m̃ A )
− V 0 (m̃ A ) = 0
∂m

(A.3)

and V 00 (m̃ A ) > 0, with X > RA (α, m̃ A ). Similarly, for the conglomerate case the
first order condition and the second order condition are given by
(1 − θ)(X + F) − (1 − θ )RC (α, m̃ C ) − [θ + (1 − θ )m̃ C ]
− (1 − θ) p F − V 0 (m̃ C ) = 0

∂ RC (α, m̃ C )
∂m
(A.4)

and V 00 (m̃ C ) > 2α(1 − θ)2 (1 − p) p/{µ̃C + (1 − µ̃C ) p}3 ≡ V1 , with µ̃i ≡ θ + (1 −
θ)m̃ i for i ∈ {A, C} and Min{X, Y } > 2RC (α, m̃ C , p). For a given level of α let
F A and F C be the minimum levels of F for which m̃ A respectively m̃ C equal
1. From Lemma 2 and (A.4) it can be seen that m̃ A and m̃ C increase monotonically in F on F ∈ [0, F A ] and [0, F C ], respectively. Furthermore let V 00 (m̃ C ) > V2 ,
with V2 ≡ V1 + (1 − p)V 00 (m̃ A ). From this it can be seen that F C > F A . Now
first consider the case where F ∈ [0, F A ]. If m̃ C (0) > m̃ A (0), then there exists a
unique F ∈ [0, F A ] such that m̃ A ( F ) = m̃ C ( F ). Since m̃ C − m̃ A decreases mono¯ that m̃ (F) > m̃ (F) for F < F ,
tonically¯ with F on F ∈ [0, F A ], it¯ can be seen
C
A
¯
whereas m̃ C (F) < m̃ A (F) for F > F . If m̃ C (0) < m̃ A (0), then m̃ C (F) < m̃ A (F) for
A
A
C ¯
all F ∈ [0, F ]. For F ∈ (F , F ) it can easily be seen that m̃ C (F) < m̃ A (F) = 1,
but the difference m̃ A − m̃ C now decreases with F. For F ≥ F C , finally, m̃ C (F) =
m̃ A (F) = 1 (corner solution). The level of capitalized future profits F for which
¯ firm as in
division A would make the same monitoring choice in a conglomerate
the stand-alone case satisfies:
·
¸
RA (α, m̃ A ) − RC (α, m̃ A ) θ + (1 − θ)m̃ A
∂ RC (m̃ A ) ∂ RA (m̃ A )
F=
−
α
−
.
¯
p
(1 − θ ) p
∂m
∂m
By substituting from (1) and (3) it follows that F = ((1 − α)[ p + (1 − p)µ̃A (2 −
¯
that there exist parameter
µ̃A )] − µ̃A )/µ̃A [ p + (1 − p)µ̃A ]2 . It can be shown

266

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

values for θ, α, X , and p such that F ∈ [0, F A ] (see the numerical example in
¯ all F ∈ [0, F A ]. After some tedious algeSection 2.3). If F < 0, then m̃ C < m̃ A for
¯
∂F
bra it can be shown that ∂α¯ < 0. In terms of α the proof is analogous. For a given
level of F define α A and α C as the minimum levels of α for which m̃ A respectively
m̃ C would equal 1. From Lemma 2 and (A.4) it can be shown that m̃ A and m̃ C
increase monotonically with α on [0, Min{α A , 1}] and [0, Min{α C , 1}], respectively. Now first consider the case where α ∈ [0, Min{α A , 1}]. If m̃ A (0) < m̃ C (0)
and α A ≤ 1, there exists a unique α ∈ [0, α A ] such that m̃ A (α ) = m̃ C ( α ). Since
m̃ C − m̃ A decreases monotonically ¯with α, then m̃ C (α) > m̃ A¯(α) for α¯∈ [0, α ),
¯
whereas m̃ C (α) < m̃ A (α) for α ∈ (α , α A ]. If m̃ A (0) < m̃ C (0) and α A > 1, then there
¯
exists an α ∈ [0, 1] such that m̃ A (α ) = m̃ C (α ) if and only if m̃ C (1) < m̃ A (1). Other¯ 1]. If m̃ ¯ (0) < m̃ (0), then m̃ < m̃ for all α ∈
¯ > m̃ (α) for all α ∈ [0,
wise, m̃ C (α)
A
C
A
C
A
A
C
[0, 1]. If α ∈ [α , Min{α , 1}], then m̃ C (α) < m̃ A (α) = 1. Finally, if α ∈ [α C , 1]
then m̃ C (α) = m̃ A (α) = 1 (corner solution). The degree of market discipline α for
which m̃ C = m̃ A equals α = ((1 − µ̃A ) p[µ̃A + (1 − µ̃A ) p] − p F µ̃A [µ̃A + ¯(1 −
µ̃A ) p]2 )/([µ̃A + (1 − µ̃A )¯ p]2 − (1 − p)µ̃2A ). From the numerical example in
Section 2.3, it follows that there exist parameter values for θ, X, p, and F such
that α ∈ [0, Min{α A , 1}]. If α < 0, then m̃ C < m̃ A for all α ∈ [0, Min{α A , 1}]. It
¯ ∂α
¯
can furthermore be shown that ∂ ¯F < 0. This completes the proof.
Proof of Corollary 1. The first part of Corollary 1 has been derived in Lemma 2.
For the second part it is sufficient to show that (A.4) < (A.3) for α = 1. This can
easily be seen from substituting α = 1. Since m̃ A = m ∗ for α = 1 the second order
condition then dictates that m̃ C < m ∗ (see Proposition 1).
Proof of Proposition 2. Conglomeration is the optimal organizational structure if the aggregate expected surplus generated by the respective divisions’ investments is (weakly) higher in a conglomerate firm than in the stand-alone option. If
division A and division B operate stand-alone, the total expected surplus equals
pY + µ̃A (X + F) − 2. In the case of conglomeration, the expected surplus equals
pY + µ̃C (X + F) + (1 − µ̃C ) p F − 2. Define 1(α, F) as the difference in total
expected surplus between the conglomerate and the stand-alone option, divided
by (1 − θ), as a function of α and F. Furthermore, let ∂ 2 1(α, F)/∂ F 2 < 0 for
F ∈ [0, F̂] with F̂ as defined below. That is, let
m̃ 00C [X + (1 − p)F] − m̃ 00A [X + F] + 2m̃ 00C (1 − p) − 2m̃ 00A < 0

or

3(1 − θ)(1 − p)V1
(1 − θ )V 000 (m̃ A ) [V 00 (m̃ C ) − V1 ]3
+
MC
[V 00 (m̃ A )]3 (1 − θ )(1 − p)2
·
¸
X+F
2
2(1 − p)2
×
−
+
X + (1 − p)F
V 00 (m̃ C ) − V1
V 00 (m̃ A )

V 000 (m̃ C ) > −

×

1
[V 00 (m̃ C ) − V1 ]3
.
2
(1 − θ)(1 − p) X + (1 − p)F

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

267

Conglomeration is optimal if and only if 1(α, F) ≥ 0, that is if
[m̃ C − m̃ A ](X + F) + (1 − m̃ C ) p F ≥ 0.

(A.5)

We first focus on the first part of Proposition 2. Consider the case where m̃ C (0) >
∂F
m̃ A (0). From Proposition 1, we have ∂α¯ < 0. Hence, this case occurs if α is
relatively low. Condition (A.5) then is always satisfied if m̃ C ≥ m̃ A , that is if
0 ≤ F ≤ F . If m̃ C < m̃ A , that is for F > F , conglomeration will only be optimal
¯ (through F) exceeds the loss due to
¯
if the expected
benefit from co-insurance
lower monitoring. For a given level of α let F̂ > F be the level of F for which
¯ for F > F̂ condition (A.5)
(1 − m̃ C ) p = (m̃ A − m̃ C ). Then it can be shown that
will be strictly violated, and the stand-alone option is optimal. The intuition is
that for F > F̂ the incentives in division A have been distorted so much that
the diversification benefit of co-insurance has completely been eliminated. No
higher value of F can make conglomeration desirable, since the probability of
capturing these higher future rents has deteriorated too much. For F > F̂, we have
1(α, F) < 0. Therefore, there exists a F̄ ∈ ( F , F̂] such that 1(α, F) ≥ 0 if F ≤ F̄,
¯ case where m̃ (0) ≤ m̃ (0), that is
and 1(α, F) < 0 if F > F̄. Next consider the
C
A
where F < 0. As can be seen from Proposition 1, this case is relevant for high
< 0, the stand-alone option is always optimal. Alterlevels of¯ α. Then, if ∂1(α,0)
∂F
∂1(α,0)
natively, if ∂ F ≥ 0, there may exist at most two levels of capitalized future
profits F on the interval [0, F̂] for which 1(α, F) = 0. Denote these values as F0
and F̄ > F0 . If F0 and F̄ > F0 exist, conglomeration is optimal for F ∈ [F0 , F̄].
The intuition is that the level of preserved rents F may first dominate the negative
incentive effect stemming from co-insurance. For higher levels of F, however,
the incentive effect becomes dominant and conglomeration becomes less optimal.
Otherwise, 1(α, F) < 0 for all F ≥ 0 and the stand-alone option is always optimal.
Next consider the second part of Proposition 2. For a given level of F consider first
the case where m̃ C (0) > m̃ A (0). This case occurs if the level of rents F is not too
high. If m̃ C ≥ m̃ A , that is, if 0 ≤ α ≤ Min{α , 1}, condition (A.5) is always satisfied.
¯ Min{α , 1}, therefore, conglomeration
If α > Min{α , 1}, then m̃ C <m̃ A . For α >
¯
¯
is optimal as long as 1(α, F) ≥ 0. Even if conglomeration
reduces division A’s
monitoring intensity, it may still be preferred if m̃ C is still sufficiently high, i.e.,
if m̃ C > m̃ A − (1 − m̃ A ) p F/(X + (1 − p)F). Define ᾱ ∈ [0, 1] as the level of α for
which 1(α, F) = 0. Since 1(α, F) decreases monotonically in α, it can be seen
that conglomeration is optimal if Min{α , 1} < α ≤ Min[ᾱ, 1]. Next consider the
case where m̃ C (0) < m̃ A (0). Since 1(α,¯ F) is monotonically decreasing in α, in
this case the stand-alone option is always optimal. This completes the proof.
Proof of Corollary 2. From Proposition 1, we have m̃ C = m̃ A = 1 for F ≥ F C .
The corollary then follows immediately from substituting this in the expected
surplus functions for the two organizational structures. Note that if we would have
restricted the maximum monitoring intensity to a level m̄ < 1, some default risk
remains for large levels of F(F ≥ F C ), even if monitoring incentives are maximized

268

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

in the conglomerate and the stand-alone option. In this case conglomeration would
be the dominant organizational structure for all F ≥ F C , since the future rents F
would be preserved more often and the negative incentive effects of conglomeration
are absent.
Proof of Lemma 4. The first order condition of division A’s optimization problem in the presence of a passive internal allocation mechanism in a conglomerate
is given by:
(1 − θ)(X + F) − (1 − θ )RA (α̂, m̃ C ) − [θ + (1 − θ )m̃ C ]α̂
− (1 − θ) p F − V 0 (m̃ C ) = 0.

∂ RA (m̃ C )
∂m
(A.7)

From comparing (A.7) with Eq. (A.4) and substituting α̂ = α(∂ RC (m)/∂m)/
(∂ RA (m)/∂m), the result follows directly, since RC (α, m) < RA (α̂, m) ∀m ∈
[0, 1].
Proof of Proposition 3. This result follows from Lemma 2 and Proposition 1.
First, we show that internal discipline (β > 0) would improve division A’s incentives in a conglomerate in the absence of a differential charge. In this case, the
total degree of market discipline that division A would be subject to vis-à-vis the
conglomerate funding rate equals α + β α(1α̂− α̂) > α. From totally differentiating
the first order condition of division A’s optimization problem in the presence of
internal discipline, it follows that m̃ C (F)|α+βα(1−α̂)/α̂ > m̃ C (F)|α ∀F ≥ 0 and that
(∂ m̃ C /∂ F)|α+βα(1−α̂)/α̂ >(∂ m̃ C /∂ F)|α >0. The (negative) slope of m̃ C (F)− m̃ A (F)
therefore becomes less steep and F increases, the more so if β grows larger, that is
∂F
¯
¯ > 0. Using a similar argument, it can be shown that the same would hold in the
∂β
presence of a differential charge. Internal discipline (β > 0) thus improves division
A’s incentives irrespective of whether differential interest rates are charged to the
divisions or not. From comparing the cut-off levels F in the absence of an internal allocation mechanism (see Proposition 1) and in¯ the presence of an internal
allocation mechanism with β > 0, it can be shown that F is larger with an internal
¯
allocation mechanism if β is sufficiently high.
Proof of Corollary 3. With β = 1, the total degree of (market) discipline that
division A is subject to equals 1. The result then follows from Lemma 2.
Proof of Proposition 4. Division B’s optimization problem if it operates standalone is given by:
Max p[Y ( p) − RB (αB , p)]
p

s.t. RB =

1
.
p

(A.8)

Division B’s optimal risk choice p̃ B if it operates as a stand-alone firm satisfies:
Y ( p) + pY 0 ( p) − (1 − αB )RB = 0

(A.9)

269

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

and the second order condition 2Y 0 ( p̃ B ) + p̃ B Y 00 ( p̃ B ) < 0, with p̃ B < p ∗ and
Y ( p̃ B ) > RB (αB , p̃ B ). Define p̃ C as division B’s risk choice in case of conglomeration and let m̃ C be division A’s optimal monitoring choice in case of conglomeration
(as before). The first order condition of division B’s optimization problem in case
of conglomeration is given by
Y ( p) + pY 0 ( p) − RC (αB , m̃ C , p) − p(∂ RC (αB , m̃ C , p)/∂ p) = 0

(A.10)

under the assumption that Min{X, Y ( p̃ C )} > 2RC . The second order condition
is given by 2Y 0 ( p̃ C ) + p̃ C Y 00 ( p̃ C ) < −(2αB (1 − µ̃C )µ̃C /[µ̃C + (1 − µ̃C ) p̃ C ]3 ) ≡ Y1 .
Observe that p̃ B and p̃ C are both monotonically increasing in α. Given division
A’s equilibrium strategy m̃ C , division B chooses p̃ C = p̃ B in a conglomerate if and
only if αB = α B ≡ µ̃C (1 − p̃ B )[µ̃C + (1 − µ̃C ) p̃ B ]/([µ̃C + (1 − µ̃C ) p̃ B ]2 − (1 −
¯ Y as 2Y 0 ( p̃ ) + p̃ Y 00 ( p̃ ) for i ∈ {B, C} and let M be equal to
µ̃C ) p̃ 2B ). Define
i
i
i
i
C
µ̃C + (1 − µ̃C ) p̃ C . Furthermore, let YC < Y2 , where Y2 equals Y1 + (( p̃ B p̃ C (1 −
µ̃C )YB )/MC2 )) < Y1 . Then it can be seen that p̃ C < p̃ B if αB > α B and p̃ C ≥ p̃ B
¯ with α, it folif and only if αB ≤ α B . Since p̃ C − p̃ B increases monotonically
¯
lows that α B ∈ (0, 1) if p̃ C (0) > p̃ B (0) and p̃ C (1) < p̃ B (1). This completes the
¯
proof.
Proof of Proposition 5. The first order condition of division A’s optimization
problem as a stand-alone firm is given by:
(1 − θ)X + (1 − θ)F(m) + [θ + (1 − θ )m]F 0 (m)
− (1 − θ)(1 − αA )RA − V 0 (m) = 0.

(A.11)

In case of conglomeration the first order condition for division A is:
(1 − θ)X + (1 − θ)(1 − p̃ C )F(m) + [1 − (1 − θ)(1 − p̃ C )(1 − m)]F 0 (m)
− (1 − θ)RC (αA , p̃ C , m) − [θ + (1 − θ )m]

∂ RC (αA , p̃ C , m)
− V 0 (m) = 0.
∂m
(A.12)

Let VA be equal to V 00 (m̃ A ) − 2(1 − θ )F 0 (m̃ A ) − µ̃A F 00 (m̃ A ) and define VC as
V 00 (m̃ C ) − 2(1 − θ)(1 − p̃C )F 0 (m̃ C ) − MC F 00 (m̃ C ). Furthermore, let VC > V1 +
(1 − p̃ C )µ̃C µ̃A VA
. Then it can be shown that, given division B’s optimal strategy p̃ C
MC2
in a conglomerate, division A improves its monitoring intensity in the case of
conglomeration if and only if:
αA ≤ α A
¯
(1 − µ̃A ) p̃ C [µ̃A + (1 − µ̃A ) p̃ C ] − p̃ C [F(m̃ A ) − (1 − m̃ A )F 0 (m̃ A )]µ̃A [µ̃A + (1 − µ̃A ) p̃ C ]2
≡
.
[µ̃A + (1 − µ̃A ) p̃ C ]2 − (1 − p̃ C )µ̃2A

270

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

If αA > α A , division A chooses higher risk in the case of conglomeration. In the
¯
case of conglomeration,
the equilibrium incentives in both divisions are determined
simultaneously. Conglomeration then is the preferred organizational structure if
the aggregate expected surplus in the case of conglomeration is higher than in the
stand-alone option, i.e., if
µ̃C X + [µ̃C + (1 − µ̃C ) p̃ C ]F(m̃ C ) + p̃ C Y ( p̃ C )
≥ µ̃A X + µ̃A F(m̃ A ) + p̃ B Y ( p̃ B ).

(A.13)

The following equilibria now can occur: (i) m̃ C ≥ m̃ A and p̃ C ≥ p̃ B ; that is, the
incentives in both divisions improve with conglomeration. In this equilibrium
αA ≤ α A and αB ≤ α B , and conglomeration is the optimal organizational struc¯ m̃ ≥ m̃ and
¯ p̃ < p̃ ; that is, division B free-rides on division A. In
ture; (ii)
C
A
C
B
this case αA ≤ α A and αB > α B and conglomeration may or may not be optimal;
¯ p̃ ≥ p̃ ; that
¯ is, division A free-rides on division B and α > α
(iii) m̃ C < m̃ A and
C
B
A
¯A
and αB ≤ α B . Conglomeration then may or may not be optimal; (iv) m̃ C < m̃ A and
¯ is, the incentives in both divisions worsen in case of conglomeration
p̃ C < p̃ B ; that
and αA > α A and αB > α B . In this equilibrium the free-riding by division B in¯
¯ in division A and vice versa. This is the equilibrium
duces excessive
risk-taking
we focus on in Section 4.2. Conglomeration then will only result in a higher expected surplus if the benefits from co-insurance are sufficiently high, otherwise
the stand-alone option will be optimal. From expression (A.13) it can be seen that,
irrespective of division A’s risk choice m̃ C in a conglomerate, conglomeration
becomes less attractive if p̃ C < p̃ B . Conglomeration then is only optimal if the distortions in division A’s risk choices are not too high. This is the case if αA is not too
large.
The following numerical example illustrates all possible equilibria. Assume
that X = 2.75, θ = 1/2, V (m) = 4m 2 , F(m) = 0.5m 1/2 and Y ( p) = 3( p − 2)2 .
Tables A.I and A.II summarize the results. Panel A of Table A.I represents the
difference m̃ C − m̃ A as a function of the market discipline parameters αA and αB .
Panel B shows the difference p̃ C − p̃ B as a function of αA and αB . Table A.II finally incorporates the differences 1 in expected surplus between the conglomerate
and the stand-alone option. From Panel B in Table A.I it is clear that p̃ C < p̃ B for
medium and high values of αB . By simultaneously solving for m̃ C and p̃ C in the
conglomerate case for different levels of αA ∈ [0, 1] and αB ∈ [0, 1], and by substituting m̃ C in the expression for α B (see the proof of Proposition 4), we find that
the cut-off level α B , above which¯division B’s incentives worsen varies between
0.3686 (for αA =¯0) and 0.3698 (for αA = 1) and thus is approximately equal to
0.37. For any αB > 0.37 division B therefore increases its risk in a conglomerate.
This worsens incentives in division A. To see this, consider the following example.
Let αB = 0.80. In this case, it can be verified that p̃ B = 0.6281 and, since αB > α B ,
¯
p̃ C < p̃ B . By simultaneously solving for m̃ C and p̃ C for different levels of αA , and
substituting p̃ C in the expression for α A given above, we find that the cut-off level
¯

271

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS
TABLE A.I
Differences in Incentives in Divisions A and B between the Conglomerate
and the Stand-Alone Option
αB
αA

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

Panel A: Differences in incentives in division A (m̃ C − m̃ A ) as a function of αA and αB
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

0.0429
0.0340
0.0251
0.0163
0.0076
−0.0010
−0.0094
−0.0177
−0.0259
−0.0340
−0.0418

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

0.0488
0.0489
0.0489
0.0490
0.0490
0.0491
0.0491
0.0492
0.0492
0.0493
0.0493

0.0430
0.0341
0.0252
0.0164
0.0077
−0.0009
−0.0094
−0.0177
−0.0259
−0.0340
−0.0419

0.0432
0.0343
0.0253
0.0165
0.0077
−0.0009
−0.0093
−0.0177
−0.0259
−0.0340
−0.0419

0.0433
0.0344
0.0254
0.0165
0.0078
−0.0008
−0.0093
−0.0177
−0.0259
−0.0341
−0.0420

0.0434
0.0345
0.0255
0.0166
0.0078
−0.0008
−0.0093
−0.0177
−0.0259
−0.0341
−0.0421

0.0436
0.0346
0.0256
0.0167
0.0079
−0.0007
−0.0093
−0.0177
−0.0260
−0.0342
−0.0421

0.0437
0.0347
0.0257
0.0168
0.0080
−0.0007
−0.0092
−0.0177
−0.0260
−0.0342
−0.0422

0.0438
0.0349
0.0258
0.0169
0.0080
−0.0006
−0.0092
−0.0176
−0.0260
−0.0342
−0.0422

0.0440
0.0350
0.0260
0.0170
0.0081
−0.0006
−0.0092
−0.0176
−0.0260
−0.0343
−0.0423

0.0441
0.0351
0.0261
0.0171
0.0082
−0.0006
−0.0092
−0.0176
−0.0260
−0.0343
−0.0423

0.0443
0.0353
0.0262
0.0171
0.0082
−0.0006
−0.0092
−0.0178
−0.0260
−0.0343
−0.0424

Panel B: Differences in incentives in division B ( p̃C − p̃ B ) as a function of αA and αB
0.0348
0.0348
0.0349
0.0349
0.0350
0.0350
0.0350
0.0351
0.0351
0.0352
0.0352

0.0215
0.0215
0.0215
0.0216
0.0216
0.0216
0.0216
0.0217
0.0217
0.0217
0.0218

0.0088
0.0088
0.0088
0.0089
0.0089
0.0089
0.0089
0.0089
0.0089
0.0090
0.0090

−0.0033
−0.0033
−0.0033
−0.0033
−0.0033
−0.0033
−0.0033
−0.0032
−0.0032
−0.0032
−0.0032

−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149
−0.0149

−0.0260
−0.0260
−0.0260
−0.0260
−0.0260
−0.0261
−0.0261
−0.0261
−0.0261
−0.0261
−0.0261

−0.0367
−0.0367
−0.0367
−0.0367
−0.0368
−0.0368
−0.0368
−0.0368
−0.0368
−0.0369
−0.0369

−0.0470
−0.0471
−0.0471
−0.0471
−0.0471
−0.0472
−0.0472
−0.0472
−0.0473
−0.0473
−0.0473

−0.0570
−0.0571
−0.0571
−0.0571
−0.0572
−0.0572
−0.0573
−0.0573
−0.0573
−0.0574
−0.0574

−0.0668
−0.0668
−0.0668
−0.0669
−0.0669
−0.0670
−0.0670
−0.0671
−0.0671
−0.0672
−0.0672

α A of αA , above which division A chooses a lower monitoring intensity in case of
¯
conglomeration,
equals 0.49. If we substitute p̃ C = p̃ B , however, α A equals 0.52.
¯
Free-riding by division B therefore shrinks the interval of αA for which
conglom1/2
eration improves incentives in division A. For F(m) = 6m it can be shown that
TABLE A.II
Difference in Total Expected Surplus between the Conglomerate and the Stand-Alone Option
αB
αA

0.0

0.1

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

0.2038
0.1875
0.1713
0.1552
0.1394
0.1240
0.1088
0.0939
0.0792
0.0648
0.0507

0.1777
0.1614
0.1451
0.1289
0.1131
0.0976
0.0824
0.0674
0.0527
0.0382
0.0241

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.1564
0.1394
0.1262
0.1163
0.1094
0.1050
0.1400
0.1230
0.1098
0.0998
0.0928
0.0884
0.1237
0.1066
0.0933
0.0834
0.0763
0.0719
0.1075
0.0904
0.0771
0.0670
0.0599
0.0555
0.0916
0.0745
0.0611
0.0510
0.0439
0.0394
0.0761
0.0589
0.0454
0.0353
0.0281
0.0236
0.0608
0.0436
0.0301
0.0199
0.0127
0.0081
0.0458
0.0285
0.0150
0.0047 −0.0025 −0.0072
0.0310
0.0137
0.0001 −0.0102 −0.0175 −0.0223
0.0164 −0.0010 −0.0146 −0.0249 −0.0323 −0.0371
0.0023 −0.0152 −0.0289 −0.0392 −0.0467 −0.0515

0.8

0.9

1.0

0.1030
0.0864
0.0698
0.0533
0.0372
0.0213
0.0058
−0.0095
−0.0246
−0.0398
−0.0543

0.1032
0.0865
0.0698
0.0533
0.0371
0.0212
0.0056
−0.0097
−0.0248
−0.0398
−0.0543

0.1052
0.0885
0.0718
0.0553
0.0390
0.0231
0.0075
−0.0079
−0.0231
−0.0381
−0.0526

272

BOOT AND SCHMEITS

m̃ C < m̃ A for all αA ∈ [0, 1] and αB ∈ [0, 1], and furthermore that 1 < 0 for all
αA and αB . In this case, therefore, conglomeration is never optimal. Finally, by
incorporating δ = 0.30 in our example, we find that α A decreases to approximately
0.35 and α B decreases to approximately 0.36 (for¯all levels of αA ). In this case
¯
the stand-alone
option becomes optimal more often; that is, conglomeration now
is only optimal if αA is smaller than approximately 0.35.

REFERENCES
Allen, J. W. (1998). Capital markets and corporate structure: The equity carve-outs of Thermo Electron,
J. Finan. Econ. 48, 99–124.
Aron, D. J. (1988). Ability, moral hazard, firm size and diversification, Rand J. Econ. 19, 72–87.
Avery, R. B., and Berger, A. N. (1991). Loan commitments and bank risk exposure, J. Banking Finance
15, 173–192.
Berger, P., and Ofek, E. (1995). Diversification’s effect on firm value, J. Finan. Econ. 37, 39–65.
Boot, A. W. A., Greenbaum, S. I., and Thakor, A. V. (1993). Reputation and discretion in financial
contracting, Amer. Econ. Rev. 83, 1165–1183.
Daley, L., Mehrotra, V., and Sivakumar, R. (1997). Corporate focus and value creation: Evidence from
spinoffs, J. Finan. Econ. 45, 257–281.
Flannery, M. J. (1994). Debt maturity and the deadweight costs of leverage: Optimally financing
banking firms, Amer. Econ. Rev. 84, 320–331.
Flannery, M. J., Houston, J. F., and Venkataraman, S. (1993). Financing multiple investment projects,
Financial Manage. 22, 161–172.
Fulghieri, P., and Hodrick, L. (1997). “Synergies and Internal Agency Conflicts, The Double-Edged
Sword of Mergers,” Working Paper, Insead and Center for Economic Policy Research.
Grossman, S. J., and Hart, O. (1986). The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and
lateral integration, J. Polit. Econ. 94, 691–719.
Harris, M., and Raviv, A. (1979). Optimal incentive contracts with imperfect information, J. Econ.
Theory 20, 231–259.
Harris, M., and Raviv, A. (1999). “Organization Design,” Working Paper, University of Chicago and
Northwestern University.
Hart, O. (1995). “Firms, Contracts and Financial Structure,” Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Holmström, B. (1979). Moral hazard and observability, Bell J. Econ. 10, 74–91.
Holmström, B. (1982). Moral hazard in teams, Bell J. Econ. 13, 324–340.
Holmström, B., and Milgrom, P. (1990). Regulating trade among agents, J. Instit. Theoret. Econ. 146,
85–105.
Holmström, B., and Tirole, J. (1993). Market liquidity and performance monitoring, J. Polit. Econ.
101, 678–709.
Itoh, H. (1991). Incentives to help in multi-agent situations, Econometrica 59, 611–636.
James, C., and Houston, J. (1996). Evolution or extinction: Where are banks headed?, J. Appl. Corp.
Finance 9, 8–23.
John, T. A., and John, K. (1993). Top-management compensation and capital structure, J. Finance 53,
949–974.
Kahn, C. M. (1992). “Project Choice, Moral Hazard, and Optimal Subsidiary Structure for Intermediaries,” Working Paper, University of Illinois.

MARKET DISCIPLINE AND INCENTIVE PROBLEMS

273

Khanna, T., and Palepu, K. (1997). Why focused strategies may be wrong for emerging markets,
Harvard Bus. Rev. 75, 41–50.
Lamont, O. (1997). Cash flow and investment: Evidence from internal capital markets, J. Finance 52,
83–109.
Li, D. D., and Li, S. (1996). A theory of corporate scope and financial structure, J. Finance 51, 691–709.
Maksimovic, V., and Phillips, G. (1998). “Optimal Firm Size and the Growth of Conglomerate and
Single-Industry Firms,” Working Paper, University of Maryland.
Milbourn, T. (1997). “The Executive Compensation Puzzle: Theory and Evidence,” Working Paper,
London Business School.
Milgrom, P., and Roberts, J. (1990). Bargaining costs, influence costs, and the organization of economic
activity, in “Perspectives on Positive Political Economy” (J. Alt and K. Shepsle, Eds.), Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.
Rajan, R. G., and Myers, S. C. (1998). The paradox of liquidity, Quart. J. Econ. 113, 733–761.
Rajan, R. G., Servaes, H., and Zingales, L. (2000). The cost of diversity: The diversification discount
and inefficient investment, J. Finance 55, 35–80.
Rajan, R. G., and Zingales, L. (1999). The tyranny of the inefficient: An enquiry into the adverse
consequences of power struggles, J. Public Econ., forthcoming.
Ramakrishnan, R. T. S., and Thakor, A. V. (1991). Cooperation versus competition in agency, J. Law
Econ. Organ. 7, 248–283.
Schipper, K., and Smith, A. (1986). A comparison of equity carve-outs and seasoned equity offerings:
share price effects and corporate restructuring, J. Finan. Econ. 15, 153–186.
Shin, H., and Stulz, R. (1998). Are internal capital markets efficient?, Quart. J. Econ. 113, 531–552.
Stein, J. C. (1997). Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources, J. Finance 52,
111–133.
Stoughton, N., and Zechner, J. (1999). “Optimal Capital Allocation Using RAROCTM and EVAr ,”
Working Paper, University of Vienna.
Varian, H. R. (1990). Monitoring agents with other agents, J. Instit. Theoret. Econ. 146, 153–174.
Wulf, J. (1998). “Influence and Inefficiency in the Internal Capital Market: Theory and Evidence,”
Working Paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Zaik, E., Walter, Kelling G., and James, C. (1996). RAROC at Bank of America: From theory to
practice, J. Appl. Corp. Finan. 9, 83–93.

